                   Agricultural Scientists’ Perceptions of
Fairness and Accuracy of Science and Agriculture Coverage in the News Media

                              Amanda Ruth
                             Graduate Student
                            University of Florida
                             amruth@ufl.edu

                                 Ricky Telg
                             Associate Professor
                            University of Florida
                           rtelg@mail.ifas.ufl.edu

                                Tracy Irani
                            Assistant Professor
                            University of Florida
                               irani@ufl.edu

                              Deanna Locke
                             Graduate Student
                            University of Florida
                            hogswild@aol.com


            Department of Agricultural Education & Communication
                              P.O. Box 110540
                             University of Florida
                          Gainesville, FL 32611-0540
                               (352) 392-0502
                            FAX: (352) 392-9585
                         Agricultural Scientists’ Perceptions of
                  Science and Agriculture Coverage in the News Media

Abstract

        This study examined Southern agricultural scientists’ perceptions of the fairness

and accuracy of news media reports on agricultural and scientific topics. A stratified

random sample of 300 Southern Association of Agricultural Scientists was drawn from

the association’s online member directory. Sixty-two agricultural scientists responded to

the online, Web-based survey, for a response rate of 20.6%. Agricultural scientists’

responses tended to fall in the middle of the five-point Likert-type scale on most of the

descriptor sets provided to them (fair/unfair, biased/unbiased, trustworthy/untrustworthy,

accurate/inaccurate, and balanced/unbalanced). However, the tendency was to be more

negative than positive. Respondents were more negative of national news coverage of

general scientific topics and topics from their agricultural disciplines, but more positive

about local news and agricultural news coverage of science and agricultural stories.

Agricultural scientists were also more favorable in their perceptions of coverage of

general science topics than of stories in their agricultural discipline.




Key Words: perceptions, accuracy, fair, balanced, reporting, agriculture, news media
           Agricultural Scientists’ Perceptions of Fairness and Accuracy of
                Science and Agriculture Coverage in the News Media

Introduction

        The reality of science for most people is what they see or read through mass

media channels (Nelkin, 1995). Good reporting allows people to evaluate science policy

issues and make rational personal choices; poor reporting can mislead a public that is

increasingly affected by science (Nelkin, 1995). The news media, therefore, play a

critical role as one of the primary means through which scientific issues are brought to

the attention of the general public (Malone, Boyd, & Bero, 2000).

        Gascoigne and Metcalfe (1997) conducted a study of 178 Australian scientists

who participated in media training workshops to find out the scientists’ attitudes toward

using the media as a mechanism of communicating their research. Scientists said the

media are generally neutral or negative when delivering scientific information to the

public. The study also indicated scientists, in general, essentially distrust the media and

doubt the media’s potential to help their field.

        Nelkin (1995), who has conducted extensive research on scientist and media

relations, wrote that scientists mistrust journalists and criticize the reporting about their

fields. Scientists also believe that journalists care little about the truth; reporters,

scientists say, are more interested in the story, rather than the facts. Nelkin also has found

that scientists complain about inaccurate, sensational, and biased reporting. She indicated

a fear among scientists that the media encourages anti-science attitudes.

        Hartz and Chappell (1997) found that scientists who are inexperienced in media

training are fearful of misrepresentation and inaccuracy. They see the media as

exploitive, manipulative, and sensationalistic in their reporting of scientific findings.
Only 11% of the scientists surveyed expressed a great deal of confidence in the media,

while 22% said they had hardly any confidence in the media. As for reporting science

issues, 30% said national television does a poor job, yet about 50% said the information

was fair. Nearly 33% of scientists said national newspapers did a better job of general

coverage, and about 50% said the national newspapers did an excellent job of science and

technology coverage.

       Hartz and Chappell (1997) also surveyed journalists about their perceptions of

scientists. Journalists complained about scientists – immersed in their own jargon – as

being intellectual and failing to explain their work simply to reporters or the public.

Reporters also said scientists needed to communicate the issue that is relevant to the

public, because science research is often complex. The survey showed that the majority

of journalists had a great deal of confidence in scientists. About 63% said they think

scientists want the public to know about their work.

       One subset of the scientific community is agricultural science. However, even

though agriculture is important to America’s economic, environmental, and cultural

growth, agricultural news is surprisingly a neglected topic in the mass media (Stringer &

Thomson, 1999). Given the importance of providing information to the public through

the news media, the question of how scientists – in this case, agricultural scientists –

perceive the coverage of scientific and agricultural topics in the news media need to be

raised. Agricultural scientists’ perceptions about story coverage may impact their

willingness to work with the media to get information to the public. Therefore, the

purpose of this study was to explore a group of agricultural scientists’ perceptions of

news media reports on agricultural and scientific news.
Methodology

       The target population for this study was agricultural scientists who are members

of the Southern Association of Agricultural Scientists (SAAS). SAAS members are

agricultural leaders in education and industry who promote the interests of Southern

agriculture (Southern Association of Agricultural Scientists, 2002). SAAS is comprised

of a diverse group of academics and professionals in the agricultural sector of 13

Southern states.

       To conduct the study, a stratified random sample (n=300) of SAAS members was

drawn from the association’s online member directory. In order to stratify the sample, the

entire SAAS membership directory was first grouped according to scientific discipline

(agricultural communications, agricultural economics, agricultural education, agronomy,

animal science, biochemistry, horticulture, plant pathology, rural sociology, and soil and

water conservation). Only members with complete directory information (name,

discipline, and e-mail address) were accessed. Every third member from each discipline

was selected to randomize the sample.

       The study utilized a 17-item, researcher-developed survey instrument that was

descriptive in nature. The instrument included sections on scientists’ perceptions of news

media, their experiences with being interviewed by news media, their level of

confidence/need for training in working with the media, and demographics. All items,

with the exception of demographics, utilized five-point Likert-type scales for each

response stem. The variables focused on for this study were the scientists’ perceptions of

stories covered by news media (all news media, national news media, local news media,

agricultural news media) pertaining to agricultural and general scientific topics.
Participants provided responses about their perceptions, based on the degree of fairness,

balance, trustworthiness, accuracy, and bias.

        To assure face and content validity, a panel of experts, comprised of media

relations experts reviewed the survey, and it was subsequently revised to reflect panel

members’ suggestions. The resulting instrument was then pilot-tested with a sub-sample

(n=17) of SAAS members who were not included in the final study. The results of the

pilot study were used to further refine the instrument for use in the actual study.

        The survey was developed as an online, Web-based survey instrument, using form

development and data collection procedures as outlined by Dillman (1999). To initiate

the survey, respondents first received an email cover letter informing them about the

Web-based survey and providing them with a respondent code to keep track of

respondents and non-respondents. After the initial posting of the survey, respondents

were given two weeks to return it. A follow-up reminder was then sent to

nonrespondents. A third and final reminder was sent one month later. After data

collection, survey response data was utilized to assess reliability of the instrument,

resulting in a Chronbach’s alpha for the overall scale of .86.

Results

        Of the 300 SAAS members surveyed, 62 responded, for a response rate of 20.6%,

with 85% (n=53) male and 15% (n=9) female respondents. The majority of respondents

had been employed in a university setting for several years; slightly more than half were

at the associate professor (20%) or full professor (31%) levels. However, 28% said their

job title fell in the “other” category, with most of these stating their titles were
“government scientist” and “Experiment Station director or superintendent.” Table 1

shows the number and percentage of respondents by discipline.

Table 1

Respondents According to Academic Discipline

Academic Discipline                    N               Percent
Agricultural Communications            0               0
Agricultural Economics                 13              21
Agricultural Education                 1               2
Agronomy                               11              17
Animal Science                         13              21
Biochemistry                           1               2
Horticulture                           12              19
Plant Pathology                        3               5
Rural Sociology                        1               2
Soil & Water Conservation              3               5
Other                                  4               6
                                       62              100

          Respondents were asked to describe their perceptions of coverage of news reports

focusing on their agricultural discipline and of scientific topics in general. Perceptions

were assessed by utilizing five sets of bipolar descriptive adjectives, each on a one-to-

five-point semantic differential scale. The sets of descriptors were “fair” (1) to “unfair”

(5), “balanced” (1) to “unbalanced” (5), “trustworthy” (1) to “untrustworthy” (5),

“accurate” (1) to “inaccurate” (5), and “biased” (1) to “unbiased” (5). The respondents

also were asked to respond to news media coverage in four categories: all news media

(encompassing national, local, and agricultural news), national news media, local news

media, and agricultural news media. The term “news media” was defined in the survey as

referring “to all of the communication channels through which news travels to the general

public (television, newspapers, radio, magazines, Internet).” The mean scores for each

news media area (all, national, local, agricultural) are provided in Tables 2-9.
           When asked about their perceptions of topics in their agricultural discipline as

reported in all news media, respondents perceived that most news media reports were

fairly neutral, with most of the responses tending to be slightly more negative on the five-

point scale than positive. The respondents felt most strongly that stories were more biased

than unbiased. The mean for each response scale item is provided in Table 2.

Table 2

Agricultural Scientists’ Perceptions of Topics from Their Agricultural Discipline
Reported in All News Media

Response scale item                   N               M                SD
Question: In the reporting of topics in your agriculture discipline, stories covered by all
news media are:
*Fair (1), Unfair (5)                 61              3.16            .711
Balanced (1), Unbalanced (5)          61              3.18            .885
Trustworthy (1), Untrustworthy (5) 61                 3.21            .819
Accurate (1), Inaccurate (5)          61              3.26            .835
Biased (1), Unbiased (5)              50              2.44            .884
*Descriptor word sets were on a five -point scale.


           Respondents felt that coverage of stories on topics in their agricultural discipline

as reported by local news media was more positive, although, again, the tendency was to

hover around a neutral stance. The respondents felt most strongly that stories were more

fair than unfair. The mean for each response scale item is provided in Table 3.

Table 3

Agricultural Scientists’ Perceptions of Topics from Their Agricultural Discipline
Reported in Local News Media

Response scale item                   N               M                SD
Question: In the reporting of topics in your agriculture discipline, stories covered by
local news media are:
*Fair (1), Unfair (5)                 62              2.42            .615
Balanced (1), Unbalanced (5)          62              2.76            .824
Trustworthy (1), Untrustworthy (5) 62                 2.76            .848
Accurate (1), Inaccurate (5)          62              3.05            .876
Biased (1), Unbiased (5)              61              2.98            .922
*Descriptor word sets were on a five -point scale.
           When asked about their perceptions of topics in their agricultural discipline as

reported in national news media, respondents indicated that news reports were more

negative than positive in each category. Respondents noted that national news reports

were more biased than unbiased, untrustworthy rather than trustworthy, inaccurate rather

than accurate, unbalanced rather than balanced, and unfair rather than fair. The mean for

each response scale item is provided in Table 4.

Table 4

Agricultural Scientists’ Perceptions of Topics from Their Agricultural Discipline
Reported in National News Media

Response scale item                   N               M                SD
Question: In the reporting of topics in your agriculture discipline, stories covered by
national news media are:
*Fair (1), Unfair (5)                 62              3.37            .854
Balanced (1), Unbalanced (5)          62              3.47            .918
Trustworthy (1), Untrustworthy (5) 62                 3.50            .937
Accurate (1), Inaccurate (5)          61              3.49            .924
Biased (1), Unbiased (5)              62              2.40            1.108
*Descriptor word sets were on a five -point scale.


           Respondents were generally positive about the coverage of topics in their

agricultural discipline as reported in agricultural news media, although only slightly so in

the biased/unbiased descriptor set. The mean for each response scale item is provided in

Table 5.
Table 5

Agricultural Scientists’ Perceptions of Topics from Their Agricultural Discipline
Reported in Agricultural News Media

Response scale item                   N               M                SD
Question: In the reporting of topics in your agriculture discipline, stories covered by
agricultural news media are:
*Fair (1), Unfair (5)                 61              2.20            .771
Balanced (1), Unbalanced (5)          61              2.53            .970
Trustworthy (1), Untrustworthy (5) 62                 2.29            .837
Accurate (1), Inaccurate (5)          62              2.24            .761
Biased (1), Unbiased (5)              62              3.05            1.137
*Descriptor word sets were on a five -point scale.


           In terms of coverage of general scientific topics covered in all news media,

respondents perceived that science stories were reported more negatively than positively.

The mean for each response scale item is provided in Table 6.


Table 6

Agricultural Scientists’ Perceptions of General Scientific Topics
Reported in All News Media

Response scale item                   N               M                SD
Question: In the reporting of general scientific topics, stories covered by all news media
are:
*Fair (1), Unfair (5)                 60              3.03            .758
Balanced (1), Unbalanced (5)          61              3.20            .726
Trustworthy (1), Untrustworthy (5) 61                 3.28            .636
Accurate (1), Inaccurate (5)          61              3.39            .714
Biased (1), Unbiased (5)              61              2.57            .865
*Descriptor word sets were on a five -point scale.


           For local news media’s coverage of general scientific topics, agricultural

respondents perceived that local news stories were more positive in three descriptor sets,

except for biased/unbiased and accurate/inaccurate. The mean for each response scale

item is provided in Table 7.
Table 7

Agricultural Scientists’ Perceptions of General Scientific Topics
Reported in Local News Media

Response scale item                   N               M                SD
Question: In the reporting of general scientific topics, stories covered by local news
media are:
*Fair (1), Unfair (5)                 60              2.53            .700
Balanced (1), Unbalanced (5)          60              2.78            .761
Trustworthy (1), Untrustworthy (5) 61                 2.82            .866
Accurate (1), Inaccurate (5)          61              3.07            .892
Biased (1), Unbiased (5)              61              2.97            .823
*Descriptor word sets were on a five -point scale.


           Interestingly, respondents were critical of national news coverage of general

scientific topics. Perceptions of each descriptor set were generally negative. The mean for

each response scale item is provided in Table 8.

Table 8

Agricultural Scientists’ Perceptions of General Scientific Topics
Reported in National News Media

Response scale item                   N               M                SD
Question: In the reporting of general scientific topics, stories covered by national news
media are:
*Fair (1), Unfair (5)                 61              3.23            .824
Balanced (1), Unbalanced (5)          61              3.46            .848
Trustworthy (1), Untrustworthy (5) 61                 3.43            .884
Accurate (1), Inaccurate (5)          61              3.34            .929
Biased (1), Unbiased (5)              61              2.39            .954
*Descriptor word sets were on a five -point scale.


           Finally, respondents were asked to provide their perception of general scientific

topic coverage in agricultural news media. Respondents’ perceptions of story coverage

were positive in each category. The mean for each response scale item is provided in

Table 9.
Table 9

Agricultural Scientists’ Perceptions of General Scientific Topics
Reported in Agricultural News Media

Response scale item                   N               M                SD
Question: In the reporting of general scientific topics, stories covered by agricultural
news media are:
*Fair (1), Unfair (5)                 59              2.46            .897
Balanced (1), Unbalanced (5)          60              2.60            .827
Trustworthy (1), Untrustworthy (5) 59                 2.47            .897
Accurate (1), Inaccurate (5)          60              2.50            .792
Biased (1), Unbiased (5)              59              3.05            1.090
*Descriptor word sets were on a five -point scale.


Discussion and Conclusions

           In general, the members of the Southern Association of Agricultural Scientists

who participated in this study had been employed in universities for several years, as

indicated by their academic rank, were male, and were more representative of the

physical and biological sciences (agronomy, animal science, biochemistry, horticulture,

plant pathology, soil and water conservation), than the social sciences (agricultural

communications, agricultural economics, agricultural education, rural sociology). A

limitation of the study was the relatively low response rate, especially in the social

science fields, which limits the generalizability of these findings. This may be due to

individuals in these fields not seeing themselves as scientists, but more as academics and

researchers. If so, this represents an interesting potential area for future research.

           Respondents’ answers tended to fall in the middle of the five-point Likert-type

scale on most of the descriptor sets (fair/unfair, biased/unbiased,

trustworthy/untrustworthy, accurate/inaccurate, and balanced/unbalanced). However, the

tendency was to be more negative than positive. Respondents were more negative of all

news coverage and national news coverage of general scientific topics and topics from
their agricultural disciplines, but more positive about local news and agricultural news

coverage of science and agricultural stories. They were most favorably disposed toward

agricultural news coverage and least favorably disposed toward national news media

coverage. A possible reason for the favorable perception of agricultural news coverage is

that they may believe agricultural news reporters are generally knowledgeable about their

disciplines and, thus, can ask the right questions and present the information in such a

way as to get the facts correct.

        As for the positive perception of local news coverage of scientific and agricultural

stories, agricultural scientists may believe that the proximity of local reporters may allow

scientists some “control” over the story because reporters can spend more time with

scientists and follow up with them with questions. The negative tendency toward national

news may be that agricultural scientists see the national news as only printing or

broadcasting bad or unfavorable news about any topic; they then translate that into

national news outlets reporting bad news about general scientific or agricultural topics.

They also may have seen previous stories where national news reporters did a poor job of

reporting the facts on complex scientific topics.

        Respondents were more favorable in their perceptions of general science coverage

than of stories in their agricultural discipline. This may be because respondents have

more knowledge of agricultural topics and, therefore, can be more critical of the content

of agricultural discipline-specific stories. Respondents were more apt to perceive stories

negatively in the biased/unbiased descriptor set than in the four other descriptor sets.

They also were more apt to perceive stories positively in the fair/unfair set than in the

other sets.
        Overall, results indicate that agricultural scientists have neutral to negative

perceptions of all news media and national news media. They are more positive about

local and agricultural news media. These perceptions could help media relations

professionals design and develop workshops to help agricultural scientists work with

reporters. If most of the agricultural scientists’ interactions will be with agricultural or

local reporters, media relations workshops could be designed to strengthen the

perceptions scientists already have of these two news media types. Training workshops

also could be tailored to help scientists develop messages that could be more positively

presented in national news media.


References

Dillman, D. A. (1999). Mail and Internet surveys: The tailored design method, Second
Edition. New York: John Wiley and Sons.

Gascoigne, T., & Metcalfe, J. (1997). Incentives and impediments to scientists
communicating through the media. Retrieved February 12, 2003, from
http://www.usyd.edu.au/su/fasts/1997/GascoigneMetcalfe.html.

Hartz, J., & Chappell, R. (1997). Worlds apart. Tennessee: First Amendment Center.

Malone, R. E., Boyd, E., & Bero, L. A. (2000). Science in the news: Journalists’
constructions of passive smoking as a social problem. Social Studies of Science, 30(5),
713-735.

Nelkin, Dorothy. (1995). Selling science: How the press covers science and technology.
New York: W. H. Freeman.

Southern Association of Agricultural Scientists. (2002). Introduction to the Southern
Association of Agricultural Scientists. Retrieved November 15, 2002, from
http://cals.agnis.vt.edu/~saas/navigator/intro.html.

Stringer, S., & Thomson, J. (1999, June 12-16). Defining agricultural issues: Daily
newspapers editors’ perspectives. Paper presented at Agricultural Communicators in
Education/National Extension Technology Conference, Knoxville, Tennessee.
