Are the Media Capable of Fair Reporting?
Remarks on the Principle of Fairness
in Professional Journalism
Klaus-Dieter Altmeppen, Klaus Arnold, and Tanja K€ossler

Abstract The aim of this contribution is to discuss the concept of fairness in
journalism. Fairness as well as the principle of justice are no keywords in journalism and journalism research. Thus, the analysis concentrates on the role the
fairness principle plays in more common concepts like ‘media ethics’, ‘objectivity’,
or ‘journalistic professionalism’. In these perspectives fairness usually means to
consider the entire aspects of public communication. Journalists constantly are
faced with those challenges. To guarantee a fair reporting professional standards
and social responsibility of journalism are meaningful impacts. Nevertheless, the
different conditions of being fair to the sources of information as well as to the
audience leads to the thesis that journalism cannot always be fair since it cannot
cope with the expectations of all groups and all aspects of public communication.
The news coverage is a result of individual constructions of reality and the result of
a greater number of organizational and institutional impacts. Thus, the news
coverage cannot cope with everybody’s expectations. Paradoxically, in some
situations journalism can only be fair, when it is unfair. Furthermore, when journalism has to perform critics and control, it should not be fair. As journalism is seen
as ‘fourth estate’, unfair reporting is just and reasonable in some cases.

Fairness and Unfairness in Journalism
The right to free speech is a basic right in democratic societies, but are people truly
able to say or write whatever they want? For everyday communication, there are
some basic restrictions, laws, conventions, and implicit rules for small talk as well

K.-D. Altmeppen (*) • T. K€
ossler
Department of Journalism, Catholic University Eichst€att-Ingolstadt, Eichst€att, Germany
e-mail: klaus-dieter.altmeppen@ku-eichstaett.de
K. Arnold
Department of Communication, University of Trier, Trier, Germany
E. Kals and J. Maes (eds.), Justice and Conflicts,
DOI 10.1007/978-3-642-19035-3_20, # Springer-Verlag Berlin Heidelberg 2012

329

330

K.-D. Altmeppen et al.

as for formal conversation in negotiations and commissions. Freedom of speech is
also governed by rules in the field of mass communication, especially in its most
important form: journalism. On the one hand, journalism in modern societies has
developed professional and ethical norms; on the other hand, journalism is
restricted by human rights and media law. Thus, not even journalists are allowed
to report whatever they want.
An important norm in terms of setting rules governing the right to free speech is
the principle of fairness. Journalists are expected to be fair to their sources of
information as well as to their audience. But what does fairness mean for these
different groups? How can journalists reconcile the fairness required in their
contact with sources with the fairness expected by the audience? And more
generally: Does fairness have the same meaning as justice or equity? How can
journalists be fair, how can they ensure equity while investigating a scandal? What
are the norms of fairness and equity, and what rules are relevant in journalism? In
addition, as revealed in many content analyses (McQuail, 1992), reporting is never
entirely fair, which gives rise to a number of questions: Are there reasons for being
‘unfair’? Why is media coverage often more or less unfair? And finally, should
media always be fair? What types of situations, events, or issues lead to or claim for
unfairness? Below, we discuss the principle of fairness in journalism and seek to
answer the above questions.

Fairness in Society and Journalism
The principle of fairness in journalism is based on the philosophical principle of
justice. According to Rawls (1971, p. 3), justice is “the first virtue of social
institutions”. Some kind of justice in a society is essential because necessary or
desired goods like the news coverage are usually scarce and people have different
perceptions about what they need to ensure their own welfare. Competing
requirements and interests lead to conflicts. To control such conflicts, an adequate
solution is required (Holzleithner, 2009). However, even journalism is a social
institution, and news coverage is not the result of the work of individual journalists:
it depends much more on specific organisational settings in the newsroom, the roles
of various positions, the pre-settings determined by the goals of the journalistic
organisation, and the influences of various technologies. Even if the individual level,
with its analysis of role perception, for example, is of importance, the individual
journalist is always embedded in organisational and institutional patterns that, as
pre-arranged structures, influence journalists’ work and behaviour in the newsroom
(Altmeppen, 2008). These institutions shall assure the professional performance of
journalism and they enable journalism to control and to solve conflicts.
In the tradition of Classical Greece, justice requires that everybody should
receive what is due or owed. And according to Aristotle, equal things should be
treated equal, and unequal things unequal. But what is owed to a person? And what
criteria should be used to judge if a treatment is equal or unequal? Today, it is

Are the Media Capable of Fair Reporting? Remarks on the Principle of Fairness

331

widely accepted that all people are equal and that everyone has the right to be
respected and to achieve some kind of self-fulfilment. But, this does not mean
everybody must be treated in the same way. In the process of the distribution of
public goods, individual, structural, and social specifics must be considered. It is
difficult to find a balance between the principle of equality and the question “what is
owed to a person” (Holzleithner, 2009, pp. 11–12). Journalism has to balance the
public requirements, e.g., it has to yield the functions of information and critic and
control with the claims of the people it reports about. That relation constantly
causes conflicts about the justice of the media coverage. How do theories of justice
answer to this problem?
Among the many current theories on justice, three are dominant. First, libertarian positions (e.g., Hayek, 1960) refute the idea of social justice. The free and
morally responsible individual is engaged in the free market, and unrestricted
markets provide better opportunities and living conditions for everybody. In this
context, only a basic legal framework is acceptable. Second, and opposing this first
view, are communitarian or egalitarian perspectives. Communitarianism is sceptical about the overemphasis of individualism: the self is not an independent entity,
but is ’inexorably linked’ to others and to the community (Sandel, 1982). Justice is
rooted in a common good and in day-to-day codes of practice.
Finally, Liberalism is located somewhere between the above perspectives. John
Rawls’s “Theory of Justice” (1971) is probably the most influential and prominent
work on justice in the 20th century. To attain commonly shared principles of justice
in pluralistic societies, Rawls develops the idea of a hypothetical “original position”
about which he states,
no one knows his place in society, his class position or social status nor does any one know
his fortune in the distribution of natural assets and abilities, his intelligence, strength, and
the like. I shall even assume that the parties do not know their conceptions of good or their
special psychological propensities. The principles of justice are chosen behind a veil of
ignorance (Rawls, 1971, p. 12).

In this situation, the free and equal, rational-thinking parties will generalise on a
neutral basis and will decide on two principles: First, “each person is to have an
equal right to the most extensive basic liberty compatible with a similar liberty for
others.” And second, “social and economical inequalities are to be arranged so that
they are both (a) to the greatest benefit of the least advantaged and (b) attached to
offices and positions open to all under conditions of fair equality and opportunity”
(Rawls, 1971, pp. 60, 83).
Several authors on media ethics have discussed and applied Rawls’s perspective
(Christians et al., 1987; Day, 1991; Lambeth, 1992; Patterson & Wilkins, 1994;
Smith, 2003; for an overview, see Craig, 2009). For example, Lambeth (1992,
p. 29) argues that Rawls provides a strong theoretical basis for the watchdog role of
the news media. A just journalist should ask critical questions in covering the major
institutions of societies, including “Are agreed upon rules and procedures followed
consistently and uniformly?” and “Do some groups have more access than others to
the policymaking process?” Christians et al. (1987, pp. 14–15) consider that the

332

K.-D. Altmeppen et al.

concept of the veil supports the protection of privacy in news reporting and
provides an argument in support of the need for basic respect for all humans.
However, although the veil protects privacy, it also supports disparity because
access to publicity depends on the power or powerlessness of those who are the
subjects of news coverage. Disparity occurs because, on one hand, the ‘mighty’
people are greedy for publicity, while on the other hand, they seek to control which
topics, pictures, or stories about their life are made public. One well-known
example in this regard is Caroline of Monaco and the Monaco royal family, who
require publicity for their charities, for example, but who also strive for control the
types of stories and pictures of them presented in the news. This conflict is the first
hint of the problematic meaning of the term ‘justice’. Whose justice is represented
in the news coverage: that of the sources or of the persons covered in the story or of
the public with its demand that news coverage be free of censorship? The crucial
question for news reporters is this: Who decides on the veil, its closeness, its
necessity and the insights behind the veil?
Journalists are challenged to decide on what represents basic information, and
what are important events and issues in politics and in other relevant fields of
society. Their opponents are commonly as powerful as the journalists themselves in
terms of the struggle regarding what is to be made public. Rawls emphasizes the
importance of protecting the weakest parties in society. The adoption of this stance
in journalism leads to a more subjective or advocational journalism as a justified
means of counteracting those in power.
However, the concept of justice has been a matter of low priority in journalism
and in journalism research. Fairness is not a keyword in the field: the discussion is
centered on terms such as ‘ethical principles’, ‘objectivity’, and ‘issues of professionalism’. To arrive at the meaning of fairness in journalism, we must approach
it from a different angle. In the first instance, this is from the viewpoints of ethics
and objectivity.

Fairness and Ethics
In principle, ethics refers to “die wissenschaftliche Besch€aftigung mit Genese und
Anwendung von Normen“ [the scientific occupation with the genesis and application of norms] (Schicha & Brosda, 2010a, p. 10ff). Media ethics, as a special case of
ethics, can be derived from targets formulated for human communication: consistency, truthfulness, argumentativity, fairness, and freedom from external constraints. What makes media communication so complex is that in order to be
perceived publicly, it has to penetrate the power structures of the media system
and it must be approved by several authorities.
Furthermore, there is at least one journalistic function that is consistently and
inevitably in conflict with the principle of fairness: “Medien haben im Rahmen
ihrer Kritik- und Kontrollfunktion die Aufgabe, gesellschaftlich relevante Skandale
aufzudecken und €
offentlich zu machen“ [In holding the function of critique and

Are the Media Capable of Fair Reporting? Remarks on the Principle of Fairness

333

control, the media have a duty to uncover scandals relevant to society and to make
them public] (Schicha & Brosda, 2010b, p. 373). In this sense, the media must
always take different parties into account. For journalists, this means finding
a balance between their own comprehension of a fair and ethical behaviour, and
the understanding of the public, the subject of the story, and the demands of the
media enterprise they work for. Accordingly, the concept of fairness in journalism
is far from an idealistic ethical approach, and closer to the types of ethical concepts
which seem to be more suitable in terms of fairness in journalism.
In turn, utilitarian ethics gives rise to a dilemma for journalists, especially in
recent times, given the overwhelming economization of the media sector.
Journalists work under the pressures of cost control and reduced resources because
media companies expect to obtain the ‘maximum profit’. The mechanisms of this
benefit clash with other benefits, such as the expectations of the audience to be well
informed or the benefit of the sources, who are concerned with the way in which
their information is reported by journalists. Again, with regard to practices in
journalism, freedom of the press appears to be incompatible with fair reporting.
A general rule in journalism, which has been applied in recent years, is that reports
based on interviews are sent to the interviewee for proofing before being published.
The sources regard this as a fair process, but at the same time they seek to delete
problematic statements. In such a case, it is important to consider exactly what is
fair-minded: the standard of journalism or the requirements of the source?
In summary, one can say that “the principle of fairness, when translated into
rules of procedure, means, when questions of wrong-doing are at issue, reporters
must attempt to determine the truth of the allegations and give the accused the
opportunity to reply” (Iggers, 1999, p. 42). This approach means that all points of
view should be considered in the public media discussion. This understanding of the
wise handling of the fairness principle in journalism practice leads to one of the
most popular terms concerning the adaptability of media ethics in the professional
working environment: objectivity.

Fairness and Objectivity
The doctrine of journalism objectivity was developed in the 1920s after almost
a century of anticipation in the popular press. After the First World War, the term
‘objectivity’ and the underlying idea became a common and fundamental principle
for the daily work of journalists, and was specifically mentioned in numerous press
codes and ethical debates. The early definitions of objectivity already resembled the
definition used today. Important keywords from the two major statements on ethics
(the 1923 code of the American Society of News Editors (ASNE) and the 1926 code
of Sigma Delta Chi) were responsibility, freedom of the press, independence,
truthfulness, impartiality and decency (Ward, 2006, pp. 214–215). In the following
years, journalists “pointed to forms of journalism that embodied the objective
norms of fairness, balance, impartiality, and verified facts”. Furthermore, the idea

334

K.-D. Altmeppen et al.

of objectivity was regarded as “a prime characteristic of a professional journalist”
(Ward, 2006, p. 219). In this comprehension, objectivity was applied in a manner
that was “stricter, more methodical, and more professional” (Ward, 2006, p. 216).
In the nineteenth century, reporting meant to reduce, rather than eliminate, bias in
political coverage. At the beginning of the twentieth century, the ideal was
“a complete detachment” (Ward, 2006, p. 217) from the subject of the article.
But the ideal of objectivity has always had its supporters and opponents. “Critics
complained that newspapers slavishly followed a superficial objectivity that
repeated official statements” (Ward, 2006, p. 215 ff).
In contrast, the muckrakers of the early twentieth century, who are today
considered the first investigative journalists, “showed how facts could add up to
a powerful opinion”. They shared the belief in facts with the objective journalists
but they resuted objectivity as neutrality. In their opinion, “facts needed interpretation and conclusion” (Ward, 2006, p. 233) and “Non-objective journalism included
analysis, interpretation, investigative reporting, dramatic description, theoretical speculation, strong comment, and campaigning” (Ward, 2006, p. 217). The
muckrackers emphasized the functions of critic and control rather than neutral news
reporting. The different functions require different self-understandings, different
methods of investigation, and different job routines. If it is considered that journalism in democratic societies must perform the functions of control and criticism, and
of establishing a countervailing power to politics and economics, then objectivity
cannot take on the role as the leading norm. It is not only that the “complexity of
the modern world called out for more interpretation” (Ward, 2006, p. 233) or that
journalism today plays an increasingly important role in the public discourse.
Objectivity is sometimes an impediment to reporting because events cannot always
be reported in an objective manner. In this regard, examples include the BP oil spill
in the Mexican Gulf and the debate about migration and racism in Germany.
Objective, and therefore fair reporting, is based on the greatest possible diversity
of information sources. However, when the sources (e.g., public relations firms) are
not fair, objectivity is unrealistic and there is no reason to strive for objectivity in
every article. In the European tradition, “objectivity was never as popular” as in
US journalism, and “opinion continued to play a substantial role, even in news
reporting” (Ward, 2006, p. 214). Nevertheless, objectivity in Germany today is part
of numerous normative catalogs, including the Press Code and broadcasting laws
and treaties. Yet one can recognize a fragmentation of the claim: Objectivity is
sometimes demanded only from news broadcasts, whereas in other regulations it
refers only to the reporting of true and proofed facts, or to the objectivity of the
entire report (Bentele, 2008).
It appears a useful approach to understand objectivity as a strategic ritual,
focusing more on its function and less on its theoretical meaning (Bentele, 2008):
“In practice, the potentially troublesome character of the concept of objectivity is
neutralized by equating objectivity with facts, sharply distinguished from opinions
and value judgements” (Iggers, 1999, p. 43). For example, the Washington Post
Standards advocate that fairness is a more meaningful principle than objectivity.
In general, a duality is inherent in codes of ethics because on the one hand their

Are the Media Capable of Fair Reporting? Remarks on the Principle of Fairness

335

principle function seems to be ensuring that the media fulfills its responsibility to
the public, whereas on the other hand there may be the impression that the primary
aim of ethical behavior is to protect the image and credibility of the press, and
therefore their interests (Iggers, 1999). In particular, economic pressure in the world
of the media leads increasingly to the violation of ethical rules; e.g. in the form of
invasion of personal privacy (Studer, 2005).
There are no rigid criteria with which to distinguish objectivity and fairness. The
concept of fairness arose mainly from the American tradition and is closer to the
idea of balance and in part to the right of reply (Bentele, 2008; see also Simmons,
1978). However, fair and responsible reporting remains essentially ambiguous and
operates on a different level to objectivity. While objectivity has as its centre the
relationship between reality and media reality, responsibility is more concerned
with the consequences of reporting, and fairness refers more to the professional
standards of journalism (Bentele, 2008).

Professional Standards and Social Responsibility, or: Why
Journalism Can Be Fair and Why It Shouldn’t Always Be Fair
Taking Rawls’s concept of justice as a starting point, even in the discourse about
journalism it appears obvious that journalism should provide information to the
public, enabling individuals to play an active role in society. Therefore, journalism
has, on the micro-level, some kind of obligation to the individual, and on the macrolevel, to society. From this, it follows that to be fair in journalism means to take
seriously the idea of social responsibility. An important and prominent milestone
regarding the concept of social responsibility in journalism was the report “Commission on the Freedom of the Press”, the so-called Hutchins Commission (Commission on the Freedom of the Press, 1947). In a situation where the freedom of the
press seemed to be endangered by increasing media concentration and the dominance of economical orientations, the aim of the commission was to propose
standards for the American press regarding the fundament of the idea of social
responsibility. As requirements for the press in a democratic society, the report
mentioned guiding principles such as factuality, the separation of news from
comment, diversity of opinion, a non-stereotyping picture of the various groups
in society, and discussion on the goals and values of society.
If journalism is conceptualized as a sense-making system with some kind of
function in society, social responsibility again plays a prominent role (G€orke &
Scholl, 2006; R€
uhl, 2008). Journalism as a set of related actions could only become
so prominent in society because it solved a societal problem that no other system
could cope with: In a situation where modern societies emerged with complex
societal systems such as politics and economy, the public required reliable information on current events to ensure they had the capacity to act in their own best
interest. Journalism is offering exactly this kind of information: On a micro-level, it

336

K.-D. Altmeppen et al.

provides orientation to the various actors in society; on a macro-level, it performs a
vital function for society: Journalism is gathering and selecting current, socially
relevant and factual topics in various sectors of society, editing them and returning
them to society as media content (L€
offelholz, 2003). In performing this role,
journalism enables a self-observation of society with broad social resonance.
Without this function of sense-orientation, journalism would simply be, for example, entertainment or propaganda.
The social responsibility of journalism is based on ethical and professional
fundaments, and has three levels: the individual level, where every journalist is
responsible for his action; the organisational level, where the newsroom management takes responsibility; and the professional level, where professional interest
groups (trade unions and trade associations) are involved in the discussion of social
responsibility.

Professionalization and Ethics as Factors in Ensuring Fair
Journalism
Given the above discussion, journalism is fair if it is socially responsible, offers
orientation to the individual and seeks, as much as possible, to fulfil its societal
function. Related to this function, journalism must follow standards based on social
responsibility, as developed by journalism itself, and that represent a framework for
professional journalism. Therefore, the media are able to present fair reporting if
they take into account the standards for social responsible journalism and the
professional standards of the job. But what are these standards or principles?
Answers to this question can be found in the literature on media standards,
performance, and quality of journalism (Altmeppen, 2006; Arnold, 2009; McQuail,
1992; Schatz & Schulz, 1992), which provides the background to the following
considerations.
Professional journalism is embedded in an organisational setting that determines
the nature of the job. Journalists are members of the newsroom, where they must
perform as expected in their position as reporter, writer, and producer. The newsroom is also the organizational background for the public roles of journalists, such
as being the disseminator or interpreter of issues and events, or being a watchdog
who observes the incidents behind the surface of the political or economic system.
This societal role of journalists is generally in conflict with a second aspect: the role
of journalists as members of a media organization. Within the media, journalists
again have to meet the expectations of the entire organization, meaning they have to
surrender certain benefits (Altmeppen & Arnold, 2010).
For example, journalists are not only aware of the rules of their daily work (news
selection, treating of sources), but also of the rules imposed by the media company,
in particular those rules related to the goals of the company. Furthermore, they are
aware of the society’s demands of journalism, and they must bring together these

Are the Media Capable of Fair Reporting? Remarks on the Principle of Fairness

337

different factors in order to work successfully and professionally. Hence, the rules
are substantial regarding the social practices of journalists, as they both enable (e.g.,
sense making, professional skills) and constrain (e.g., economic goals, environmental conditions) (Altmeppen, 2008).
Because only a free and therefore independent press can live up to its own
professional standards and build a societal identity, the most important principle or
prerequisite for fair reporting is independence of the news media. The idea of
independence implies that outside influences are in some way limited and controlled by the media: There should be no major impact on journalism from the
political and economical system. This does not mean that news media cannot have a
certain political slant, but that journalists should take sides in their news coverage
not because they must follow some party line, but because they concluded that their
audience would benefit more from a certain solution than from others. Similarly,
because news media are generally profit-oriented companies, they must take into
account economical imperatives. But to blur the line between advertising and
journalism content is unacceptable, and while acknowledging that profit is important, a media company should provide the resources required by journalists to do
a professional job. Therefore, a long-term strategy that aims to produce quality
journalism seems to be more appropriate than a short-term drive for maximum
profit.
An independent journalism should be able to reflect the diversity of a pluralistic
society. The media are expected to offer a wide range of subjects, issues, and
opinions. The various groups of society must have access to the media, and
journalists should access a wide range of news sources. Of course, media channels
have only limited space and time, meaning that complete diversity is impossible.
For this reason, diversity is closely linked to the next aspect of fair journalism—the
principle of relevance. Despite these limitations, news media should try to be open
and provide access to or report on new or unusual opinions or ideas. Access to the
media should not be restricted to established elites, but be available to minorities
and interests that are not fostered by well-organized groups. Thus, unfair reporting
starts when journalists perform the first task of their job: the selection of news.
Because the media should provide orientation to the individual and offer a selfobservance of society, another important criterion of fair journalism is relevance.
The notion of relevance has external and internal dimensions. From an external
perspective, the media are expected to report on events or issues that are important
for both the individual and for society. To achieve this aim, journalism developed
the concept of news values, which guide the process of selecting news (Galtung &
Ruge, 1965; Maier et al., 2010). Internal relevance is usually understood as
completeness. Again, it is impossible to include all aspects of an event or issue in
a news report, but sufficient basic information should be provided to understand the
story.
News reporting is about facts rather than fiction. Consequently, factuality is
a central criterion for fair journalism. Facts should be reported accurately, citations
should be correct, and, most difficult of all, facts and opinions should be arranged
and connected in a plausible and coherent way, taking into account causes and

338

K.-D. Altmeppen et al.

possible consequences. To achieve a high degree of factuality, journalists must be
free to carry out research or investigations and to check the accuracy of information
offered to them by various parties with their own special interests. Moreover, fair
journalists must consider the degree of transparency in their news presentations—
sources should be mentioned. To enable the audience to judge the arguments,
proposals or problem solutions quoted in news presentations, it is also important
to provide information on the sources: What are their interests? Are their arguments
widely shared or do they express a rather isolated opinion?
Because the audience, as citizens, requires an informational basis on which to
form their opinions, impartiality is another important factor in fairness. According
to the objectivism paradigm, news is expected to be presented in a neutral way,
without subjective evaluations and without being mixed with comment. Similarly,
news should be balanced; for example, in a conflict situation, both sides should be
given equal space. In terms of criticism and comments: Are they unfair? No, of
course not—society also needs an institution that is not primarily following an
economic or political logic and thus is well suited to criticise actions and communications in other societal systems. Indeed, criticising and controlling the powerful,
in the name of the audience and of those without a loud voice in society, is also
an essential fairness norm in journalism. But the audience should not be manipulated
or offered a news article that presents the facts in a partisan way; consequently,
news and comment must be kept separate.
There exists another notion of fairness, concerned with the people who appear
in the news rather than with the audience. Essentially, each person has the right
to privacy, meaning that fair journalists handle with care information on the
private or intimate sphere of people. This is especially important with regard to
“normal” people who, due to certain circumstances, become a “news object”,
but it also applies to celebrities, who likewise have the right to privacy. Of course,
journalists must take into account the public interest and should seek a balance
between the protection of privacy and the public’s right to know, which represents a difficult task.
Throughout the world, these standards are mentioned in very similar ways
in, for example, textbooks on ethics and in codes of conduct (Christians et al.,
1987; Day, 1991; Keeble, 2009; Schicha & Brosda, 2010c; Rivers, Schramm &
Christians, 1980; Wilkins & Christians, 2009). Indeed, these standards should,
at least in theory, guarantee the kind of professional news journalism that is typical
for the United States and for many European countries (Hallin & Mancini, 2004),
although whether it is always possible to follow such standards is another matter.
But there is more to fairness in journalism. Journalism respecting its audience and
taking its needs seriously is not (only) reporting on the sphere of national and global
power elites in some abstract or detached way: It also cares about the personal
sphere, the life-world of the people. News presentations should not (only), as stated
by the media scholar John Fiske, disseminate information considered socially
necessary, but rather “make such information popular – which means to make it
matter, to encourage it to be taken up within micro-level cultures” (Fiske, 1989/
2000, p. 193). Therefore, journalism that is fair to people is easily comprehensible

Are the Media Capable of Fair Reporting? Remarks on the Principle of Fairness

339

and has, in the sense of infotainment, some entertainment value. And it is important
to journalism that information is not abstract, but is connected to the daily life of the
audience: What do new laws or new advancements in science mean for me and my
life? How do national politics affect my community? But this is only half of the
story: Fair journalism also seeks to take up the problems of the people in their lifeworld and relate them to a broader context. In this way, journalism encourages the
audience to care for his/her neighbourhood or community. And finally, the lifeworld should be present in journalism in a very direct way. Fair journalism in not a
one-way street: it offers its audience the chance to express its opinions to a larger
audience. In the age of the Internet, this is no longer a technical problem and is
easily achieved. This kind of journalism is known as public or civic journalism—an
idea that became popular in the US in the 1990s (Glasser, 1999; Merritt, 1995;
Rosen, 1999).
In summary, journalism ideally is a mixture of neutral, objective news journalism that is diverse, balanced, and that separates facts from comments, and a
journalism that is close to the audience’s life-world. This perspective should not
be seen as involving a contradiction: life-world aspects can be integrated into the
news paradigm, and combinations of both kinds of journalism are possible. However, both objective news reporting and a more committed journalism face many
obstacles, so in practice it is not easy to produce fair journalism in the sense
discussed above.

Reasons for an ‘Unfair’ Journalism
There are some reasons and cases for which adhering to the overall fairness
principle would mean, in some sense, to be unfair. This applies especially to the
objectivism paradigm. Because it is difficult or even impossible to present genuinely neutral news, it is logical to ask if it is therefore fair to present news with a
slant, assuming the audience realizes the newspaper or magazine is following a
certain political line. For example, in Southern Europe and France, news and
comment are not as strictly separated as in the US media system (Hallin & Mancini,
2004), and in Germany, one of the flagships of quality journalism, the newsmagazine “Der Spiegel”, famous for its investigative journalism and harsh criticism, is anything but neutral. Indeed, journalists who take their social responsibility
seriously, who criticise the powerful and disclose scandals, the abuse of power, and
corruption, can hardly present balanced reports in which all parties are treated
“fairly”, as those who are criticised will always feel that the media are unfair to
them.
There are additional cases for which balanced reports are not appropriate; e.g.,
conflicts in which one side is making false claims. In this regard, consider the
controversy about climate change. The 2007 UN Report on Global Warming1 states

1
Reports of the UN-organised Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change can be found online
(http://www.ipcc.ch).

340

K.-D. Altmeppen et al.

that most serious scientists are sure that climate change is depending on carbon
dioxide. Therefore, journalists are not only unfair but also misleading their audience if they report on climate change in a “balanced” way, giving equal coverage to
established researchers and to obscure scientists funded by the oil industry, who
deny the influence of human activities on climate change. Or consider the 2009
debate on US health care and the so-called “death panels”—a phrase coined by
former Alaska governor Sarah Palin, who claimed on her Facebook page that
President Obama planned to launch panels charged with the responsibility of
judging whether the disabled or elderly are entitled to health care. Of course, the
health care bill that passed House committees at the time contained no mention of
any type of “death panels”, just a passage that would require Medicare to pay for
voluntarily end-of-life planning sessions with a healthcare practitioner.2 In this
case, it is surely fairer to criticise Palin and to demonstrate that her statements are
untrue than to seriously convey her political propaganda. Still another example is
radical political groups such as fascists or neo-Nazis who have no respect for
fundamental democratic values. Should journalists report about them in a “balanced” and neutral way, giving them space/time in the media and taking their
claims more or less seriously?
There is one principle that underlies all these examples: In order to be fair to
their main reference group, their audience, journalists sometimes have to treat
“unfairly” those who are breaking the rules of society and who are unfair themselves. Finally, not only does the objectivism paradigm have some limitations, but
so does reporting oriented toward the life-world. For example, news that
concentrates on entertainment values and that seeks to explain even very complex
issues in two or three sentences, is more or less useless in providing the audience
with information as a basis for rational decisions. In addition, news produced by
people in their life-world, such as Internet blogs, represents a useful supplement to
“official” news reporting, but cannot replace professional journalism.

Resume
In November 2010, Wikileaks published confidential American diplomatic cables.
In addition to enormous worldwide attention, this event initiated an intensive
discussion on the future role of journalism. The Internet apologists received new
ammunition in their claim of the end of journalism, arguing it would be superseded
by new Internet platforms. More sober-minded experts treaded more cautiously,
noting that journalism is frequently under threat but has survived to date. Of course,
the Wikileaks case also raises questions of fairness. Experts debate the legality of

2

For more information, see www.factcheck.org/2009/08/palin-vs-obama-death-panels/.

Are the Media Capable of Fair Reporting? Remarks on the Principle of Fairness

341

publishing secret documents and the consequences for diplomacy, while the Internet community celebrates the Wikileaks scoop.
Downie and Schudson (2009) analyzed these events and their consequences,
concluding that,
[r]eporting is becoming more participatory and collaborative. The ranks of news gatherers
now include not only newsroom staffers, but freelancers, university faculty members,
students, and citizens. Financial support for reporting now comes not only from advertisers
and subscribers, but also from foundations, individual philanthropists, academic and
government budgets, special interests, and voluntary contributions from readers and
viewers. There is increased competition among the different kinds of news gatherers, but
there also is more cooperation, a willingness to share resources and reporting with former
competitors. That increases the value and impact of the news they produce, and creates new
identities for reporting while keeping old, familiar ones alive. (Downie & Schudson, 2009,
p. xx).

In something of a contradiction to this statement, the authors note the necessity
of an independent reporting, that
not only reveals what government or private interests appear to be doing but also what lies
behind their actions. This is the watchdog function of the press—reporting that holds
government officials accountable to the legal and moral standards of public service and
keeps business and professional leaders accountable to society’s expectations of integrity
and fairness. (Downie Jr & Schudson, 2009, p. xx).

Journalism and this watchdog function are connected to several requirements of
responsibility. One of them is fairness, which is ensured by following the professional standards of journalism. It is no longer enough that “[r]eporting the news
means telling citizens what they would not otherwise know.”—Wikileaks can also
perform this job. However, what Wikileaks cannot do, and what such organizations
lack, is the credibility and reputation of established journalism, based on fairness
and objectivity as rules of the profession. It seems that simply the rules regarding
freedom of speech ensure that society can have trust in journalism.

References
Altmeppen, K.-D. (2006). Journalismus und Medien als Organisationen. Leistungen, Strukturen
und Management [Journalism and media as organisations. Performance, structures, and management]. Wiesbaden, Germany: VS Verlag.
Altmeppen, K.-D. (2008). The structure of news production: The organizational approach to
journalism research. In M. L€
offelholz & D. Weaver (Eds.), Global journalism research.
Theories, methods, findings, future (p. 52). Malden, MA: Wiley-Blackwell.
Altmeppen, K.-D., & Arnold, K. (2010). Ethik und Profit [Ethic and profit]. In C. Schicha &
C. Brosda (Eds.), Handbuch Medienethik (pp. 331–347). Wiesbaden, Germany: VS Verlag.
Arnold, K. (2009). Qualit€
atsjournalismus. Die Zeitung und ihr Publikum [Quality in journalism.
The newspaper and its audience]. Konstanz, Germany: Universit€atsverlag Konstanz.
Bentele, G. (2008). Objektivit€
at und Glaubw€
urdigkeit: Medienrealit€
at rekonstruiert [Objectivity
and credibility. Constructing media realities]. Wiesbaden, Germany: VS Verlag.

342

K.-D. Altmeppen et al.

Christians, C. G., Rotzoll, K. B., & Fackler, M. (Eds.). (1987). Media ethics. Cases and moral
reasoning (2nd ed.). New York, NY: Longman.
Craig, D. A. (2009). Justice as a journalistic value and goal. In L. Wilkins & C. G. Christians
(Eds.), The handbook of mass media rthics (pp. 203–216). London, UK: Routledge.
Day, L. A. (1991). Ethics in media vommunications: Cases and vontroversies. Belmont, CA:
Wadsworth Publishing.
Downie Jr., L., & Schudson, M. (2009). The Reconstruction of American journalism. A report.
Retrieved from http://www.cjr.org/reconstruction/the_reconstruction_of_american.php
Fiske, J. (2000). Reading the popular. 2. impression. London, UK: Roudledge. Original work
published in 1989.
Galtung, J., & Ruge, M. H. (1965). The structure of foreign news. Journal of Peace Research, 1,
64–90.
Glasser, T. L. (Ed.). (1999). The idea of public journalism. New York, NY: The Guilford Press.
G€orke, A., & Scholl, A. (2006). Niklas Luhmann’s theory of social systems and journalism
research. Journalism Studies, 7(4), 645–656.
Hallin, D. C., & Mancini, P. (2004). Comparing media systems. Three models of media and
politics. Cambridge, UK: Cambridge University Press.
Hayek, F. A. (1960). The constitution of liberty. Chicago, IL: University of Chicago Press.
Holzleithner, E. (2009). Gerechtigkeit [Justice]. Stuttgart, Germany: UTB.
Iggers, J. (1999). Good news, bad news. Journalism ethics and the public interest. Boulder, CO:
Westview Press.
Keeble, R. (2009). Ethics for journalists (2nd ed.). London, UK: Routledge.
Lambeth, E. B. (1992). Committed journalism. An ethic for the profession (2nd ed.). Bloomington,
IN: Indiana University Press.
L€offelholz, M. (2003). Kommunikatorforschung: Journalistik [Communicator research: Journalistic]. In G. Bentele, H.-B. Brosius, & O. Jarren (Eds.), O¨ffentliche Kommunikation. Handbuch
Kommunikations- und Medienwissenschaft (pp. 28–53). Wiesbaden, Germany: VS Verlag.
Maier, M., Stengel, K., & Marschall, J. (2010). Nachrichtenwerttheorie [News value theory].
Berlin, Germany: Nomos.
McQuail, D. (1992). Media performance. Mass communication and the public interest. London,
UK: Sage Publications.
Merritt, D. (1995). Public journalism and public life. Why telling the news is not enough (2nd ed.).
Hillsdale, NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum Associates.
Patterson, P., & Wilkins, L. (1994). Media ethics. Issues and cases. Madison, WI: Brown &
Benchmark.
Rawls, J. (1971). A theory of justice. The original edition. Cambridge, MA: Harvard University
Press.
Rivers, W. L., Schramm, W., & Christians, C. G. (Eds.). (1980). Responsibility in mass communication (3rd ed.). New York, NY: Harpercollins.
Rosen, J. (1999). What are journalists for? New Haven, CT: Yale University Press.
R€uhl, M. (2008). Journalism in a globalizing world society. A societal approach to journalism
research. In M. L€
offelholz & D. Weaver (Eds.), Global journalism research. Theories,
methods, findings, future (pp. 28–38). Malden, MA: Wiley-Blackwell.
Sandel, M. (1982). Liberalism and the limits of justice. Cambridge, UK: Cambridge University
Press.
Schatz, H., & Schulz, W. (1992). Qualit€at von Fersehprogrammen. Kriterien und Methoden zur
Beurteilung von Programmqualit€at im dualen Fernsehen [Quality in TV programming. Criteria
and methods for assessing programme quality in the dual TV system]. Media Perspektiven, 11,
690–712.
Schicha, C., & Brosda, C. (2010a). Einleitung [Introduction]. In C. Schicha & C. Brosda (Eds.),
Handbuch Medienethik (pp. 9–20). Wiesbaden, Germany: VS Verlag.
Schicha, C., & Brosda, C. (2010b). Medienskandale [Media scandals]. In C. Schicha & C. Brosda
(Eds.), Handbuch Medienethik (pp. 373–390). Wiesbaden, Germany: VS Verlag.

Are the Media Capable of Fair Reporting? Remarks on the Principle of Fairness

343

Schicha, C., & Brosda, C. (Eds.). (2010c). Handbuch Medienethik [Handbook media ethics].
Wiesbaden, Germany: VS Verlag
Simmons, S. J. (1978). The fairness doctrine and the media. Berkeley, CA: University of
California Press.
Smith, R. F. (2003). Groping for ethics in journalism (5th ed.). Ames, IA: Wiley-Blackwell.
Studer, P. (2005). Fairness – Leerformel oder durchsetzbare Forderung? Das Wertwort Fairness
in ausgew€
ahlten Bereichen der ethischen und juristischen Praxis [Fairness – empty phrase or
enforceable demand? The valuable term fairness in depicted examples of ethical and legal
practice]. Konstanz, Germany: UVK
The Commission on Freedom of the Press. (1947). A free and responsible press. Retrieved from
http://www.archive.org/details/freeandresponsib029216mbp
Ward, S. J. A. (2006). The invention of journalism ethics. The path to objectivity and beyond.
Kingston, CA: McGill-Queen’s University Press.
Wilkins, L., & Christians, C. G. (Eds.). (2009). The handbook of mass media ethics. London, UK:
Routledge.

