Zurich Open Repository and
Archive
University of Zurich
University Library
Strickhofstrasse 39
CH-8057 Zurich
www.zora.uzh.ch
Year: 2020

Diversity, Fairness, and Data-Driven Personalization in (News)
Recommender System (Dagstuhl Perspectives Workshop 19482)
Bernstein, Abraham ; de Vreese, Claes H ; Helberger, Natali ; Schulz, Wolfgang ; Zweig, Katharina A

Abstract: As people increasingly rely on online media and recommender systems to consume information,
engage in debates and form their political opinions, the design goals of online media and news recommenders have wide implications for the political and social processes that take place online and offline.
Current recommender systems have been observed to promote personalization and more effective forms
of informing, but also to narrow the user’s exposure to diverse content. Concerns about echo-chambers
and filter bubbles highlight the importance of design metrics that can successfully strike a balance between accurate recommendations that respond to individual information needs and preferences, while at
the same time addressing concerns about missing out important information, context and the broader
cultural and political diversity in the news, as well as fairness. A broader, more sophisticated vision
of the future of personalized recommenders needs to be formed - a vision that can only be developed
as the result of a collaborative effort by different areas of academic research (media studies, computer
science, law and legal philosophy, communication science, political philosophy, and democratic theory).
The proposed workshop will set first steps to develop such a much needed vision on the role of recommender systems on the democratic role of the media and define the guidelines as well as a manifesto for
future research and long-term goals for the emerging topic of fairness, diversity, and personalization in
recommender systems.
DOI: https://doi.org/10.4230/DagRep.9.11.117

Posted at the Zurich Open Repository and Archive, University of Zurich
ZORA URL: https://doi.org/10.5167/uzh-197678
Journal Article
Published Version

The following work is licensed under a Creative Commons: Attribution 3.0 Unported (CC BY 3.0)
License.
Originally published at:
Bernstein, Abraham; de Vreese, Claes H; Helberger, Natali; Schulz, Wolfgang; Zweig, Katharina A
(2020). Diversity, Fairness, and Data-Driven Personalization in (News) Recommender System (Dagstuhl
Perspectives Workshop 19482). Dagstuhl Manifestos, 9(11):117-124.
DOI: https://doi.org/10.4230/DagRep.9.11.117

Report from Dagstuhl Perspectives Workshop 19482

Diversity, Fairness, and Data-Driven Personalization in
(News) Recommender System
Edited by

Abraham Bernstein1 , Claes De Vreese2 , Natali Helberger3 ,
Wolfgang Schulz4 , and Katharina A. Zweig5
1
2
3
4
5

Universität Zürich, CH, bernstein@ifi.uzh.ch
University of Amsterdam, NL, c.h.devreese@uva.nl
University of Amsterdam, NL, n.helberger@uva.nl
Universität Hamburg, DE, w.schulz@hans-bredow-institut.de
TU Kaiserslautern, DE, zweig@cs.uni-kl.de

Abstract
As people increasingly rely on online media and recommender systems to consume information,
engage in debates and form their political opinions, the design goals of online media and news
recommenders have wide implications for the political and social processes that take place online
and offline. Current recommender systems have been observed to promote personalization and
more effective forms of informing, but also to narrow the user’s exposure to diverse content.
Concerns about echo-chambers and filter bubbles highlight the importance of design metrics that
can successfully strike a balance between accurate recommendations that respond to individual
information needs and preferences, while at the same time addressing concerns about missing out
important information, context and the broader cultural and political diversity in the news, as
well as fairness. A broader, more sophisticated vision of the future of personalized recommenders
needs to be formed–a vision that can only be developed as the result of a collaborative effort by
different areas of academic research (media studies, computer science, law and legal philosophy,
communication science, political philosophy, and democratic theory). The proposed workshop
will set first steps to develop such a much needed vision on the role of recommender systems
on the democratic role of the media and define the guidelines as well as a manifesto for future
research and long-term goals for the emerging topic of fairness, diversity, and personalization in
recommender systems.
Seminar November 24–29, 2019 – http://www.dagstuhl.de/19482
2012 ACM Subject Classification Information systems → Information retrieval diversity, Applied computing → Psychology, Human-centered computing → Empirical studies in HCI, Applied computing → Sociology, Information systems → Digital libraries and archives, Humancentered computing → HCI theory, concepts and models, Applied computing → Economics,
Information systems → Web services
Keywords and phrases News, recommender systems, diversity
Digital Object Identifier 10.4230/DagRep.9.11.117

Except where otherwise noted, content of this report is licensed
under a Creative Commons BY 3.0 Unported license
Diversity, Fairness, and Data-Driven Personalization in (News) Recommender System, Dagstuhl Reports, Vol. 9,
Issue 11, pp. 117–124
Editors: Abraham Bernstein, Claes De Vreese, Natali Helberger, Wolfgang Schulz, and Katharina A. Zweig
Dagstuhl Reports
Schloss Dagstuhl – Leibniz-Zentrum für Informatik, Dagstuhl Publishing, Germany

118

19482 – Diversity, Fairness, and Data-Driven Personalization in (News) Rec. Sys.

1

Executive Summary

Abraham Bernstein (Universität Zürich, CH)
Claes De Vreese (University of Amsterdam, NL)
Natali Helberger (University of Amsterdam, NL)
Wolfgang Schulz (Universität Hamburg, DE)
Suzanne Tolmeijer (Universität Zürich, CH)
Katharina A. Zweig (TU Kaiserslautern, DE)
License

Creative Commons BY 3.0 Unported license
© Abraham Bernstein, Claes De Vreese, Natali Helberger, Wolfgang Schulz, Suzanne Tolmeijer,
and Katharina A. Zweig

The Dagstuhl Perspectives Workshop 19482 on Diversity, Fairness, and Data-Driven Personalization in (News) Recommender Systems,1 took place from November 24 to November 29
at Schloss Dagstuhl in Germany. The goal of the workshop was to bring together researchers
from the various disciplines relevant to news recommender systems (computer, communications, legal, and political science) to (1) develop a joint understanding of the issues arising
for society with regards to the diversity and fairness of recommender systems, (2) identify
the gaps in science, practice and regulation with regards to these topics, and (3) to compile
a set of recommendations–in the form of a manifesto–that outlines needed steps from all
actors involved to address the societal issues at hand.

Workshop Schedule
The workshop was organized in the following phases:
Welcome and introductions This first phase introduced the workshop goal to the participants and then offered each of them five minutes to introduce their research activities,
expertise, their interest in the topic, and research directions they see as relevant to the
workshop’s topic.
Impulse presentations Given the diversity of the backgrounds of the participants, eight brief
stage setting presentations where given. The goal of these was to establish a common
ground in terms of relevant questions and common vocabulary.2
Topical breakout group discussions Based on the introducing presentations and impulse
presentations, the next phase of the workshop was organized around topical breakout
groups. Topics discussed included relating fairness to diversity, user desiderata and
characteristics, wider societal implications, governance, data requirements, and clustering
of research gaps.
Writing sessions The next phase was focused on jointly drafting the manifesto that incorporated recommendations developed from discussions so far and compiling them into a
coherent document.
The remainder of this text provides the abstracts of the impulse presentations. The
insights resulting from our discussions can be found in the manifesto document, which will
be published in due course.

1
2

See workshop home page at https://www.dagstuhl.de/19482
Brief abstracts of these talks can be found in this document.

A. Bernstein, C. De Vreese, N. Helberger, W. Schulz, and K. A. Zweig

2

119

Table of Contents

Executive Summary
Abraham Bernstein, Claes De Vreese, Natali Helberger, Wolfgang Schulz, Suzanne
Tolmeijer, and Katharina A. Zweig . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 118
Overview of Talks
Bringing Diversity to News Recommender Algorithms
Abraham Bernstein . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 120
News Recommender Systems (NRS) – A communication science perspective
Claes De Vreese . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 120
Algorithmic Accountability and Fairness – A computer scientist’s perspective
Marc Hauer . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 121
Democratic theory and Recommendations
Natali Helberger . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 121
Legal media policy
Wolfgang Schulz . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 121
Toward Measuring Viewpoint Diversity in News Consumption
Nava Tintarev . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 122
Measuring diversity in news recommendations – Or, at least, an attempt
Sanne Vrijenhoek . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 123
Computer science perspective: Measures as models of society
Katharina A. Zweig . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 123
Participants . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 124

19482

120

19482 – Diversity, Fairness, and Data-Driven Personalization in (News) Rec. Sys.

3

Overview of Talks

3.1

Bringing Diversity to News Recommender Algorithms

Abraham Bernstein (Universität Zürich, CH)
Creative Commons BY 3.0 Unported license
© Abraham Bernstein
Joint work of Abraham Bernstein, Bibek Paudel, Suzanne Tolmeijer
Main reference Bibek Paudel, Fabian Christoffel, Chris Newell, Abraham Bernstein: “Updatable, Accurate,
Diverse, and Scalable Recommendations for Interactive Applications”, TiiS, Vol. 7(1), pp. 1:1–1:34,
2017.
URL https://doi.org/10.1145/2955101
License

Recommender systems have become a backbone of consumption. They combine information
about items and previous behavior of users to personalize the user’s experience when reading
the news, buying goods, or choosing what to watch in the evening. This talk issuccinctly
introduces how recommender systems work to establish the technical underpinnings for all
workshop attendees and suggests various approaches for how diversity can be added to them
as as an additional target measure.

3.2

News Recommender Systems (NRS) – A communication science
perspective

Claes De Vreese (University of Amsterdam, NL)
Creative Commons BY 3.0 Unported license
© Claes De Vreese
Main reference Nicholas Diakopoulos: “Towards a Design Orientation on Algorithms and Automation in News
Production”, Digital Journalism, Vol. 7(8), pp. 1180–1184, Routledge, 2019.
URL https://doi.org/10.1080/21670811.2019.1682938
Main reference Judith Möller, Damian Trilling, Natali Helberger, Bram van Es: “Do not blame it on the algorithm:
an empirical assessment of multiple recommender systems and their impact on content diversity”,
Information, Communication & Society, Vol. 21(7), pp. 959–977, Routledge, 2018.
URL https://doi.org/10.1080/1369118X.2018.1444076
Main reference Neil Thurman, Seth C. Lewis, Jessica Kunert: “Algorithms, Automation, and News”, Digital
Journalism, Vol. 7(8), pp. 980–992, Routledge, 2019.
URL https://doi.org/10.1080/21670811.2019.1685395
License

In this Introduction talk, NRS are contextualized as part of a larger development towards
the role of data and automated decision making both in the production, dissemination, and
consumption of news, in a changing media ecosystem. It is highlighted that communication
science research often focuses on the user and effects on the user, but that in the space of
NRS there is still a relative paucity of empirical research in this area. Recent publications
have called for more attention to the design and features of NRS and the implications for
user agency and effects on users’ knowledge, attitudes and behavior. The diversity notion
has been central in communication science for decades, and there is a clear need to expand
diversity research in NRS beyond topical diversity to also include medium, device, outlet and
content (e.g., tone, frame, actors) diversity. The talk concludes with a number of emerging
topics in communication science research on NRS, such as the role of conversational agenda,
NRS and platforms like YouTube, the role of NRS in journalistic production routines, and
the potentially unintended consequences on diversity in NRS.

A. Bernstein, C. De Vreese, N. Helberger, W. Schulz, and K. A. Zweig

3.3

121

Algorithmic Accountability and Fairness – A computer scientist’s
perspective

Marc Hauer (TU Kaiserslautern, DE)
License

Creative Commons BY 3.0 Unported license
© Marc Hauer

The talk gave a short outline about three notions of algorithmic accountability, the Algorithm
Accountability Lab of TU Kaiserslautern is currently working on, namely how to assign
responsibilities in the development of ADM-systems, the various and incompatible measures
of fairness, and a regulation approach that has been included into the final report of the
German Datenethikkomission.
References
1
Alexander Filipociv, Christopher Koska, Claudia Paganini. Ethik für Algorithmiker. Bertelsmann Stiftung, 2018, https://doi.org/10.11586/2018033.
2
Tobias D. Krafft, Katharina A. Zweig. Transparenz und Nachvollziehbarkeit algorithmenbasierter Entscheidungsprozesse. Bundesverband Verbraucherzentrale, 2019,
https://www.vzbv.de/sites/default/files/downloads/2019/05/02/19-01-22_zweig_krafft_
transparenz_adm-neu.pdf.

3.4

Democratic theory and Recommendations

Natali Helberger (University of Amsterdam, NL)
Creative Commons BY 3.0 Unported license
© Natali Helberger
Main reference Natali Helberger: “On the Democratic Role of News Recommenders”, Digital Journalism, Vol. 7(8),
pp. 993–1012, Routledge, 2019.
URL https://doi.org/10.1080/21670811.2019.1623700
License

The argument that this presentation made is that diversity in the media is a concept
with a mission: to further the values democratic societies are grounded in. Building on
a brief discussion of four selected democratic theories of the media (liberal, participatory,
deliberative and critical/antagonistic) and the growing body of literature about the digital
turn in journalism, the presentation offered a conceptual framework for assessing the threats
and opportunities around the democratic role of news recommenders. The talk concluded
with developing a typology of different “democratic recommenders”.

3.5

Legal media policy

Wolfgang Schulz (Universität Hamburg, DE)
License

Creative Commons BY 3.0 Unported license
© Wolfgang Schulz

The talk gives a legal perspective on diversity and the recent challenges for the concept.
In German broadcasting regulation (like in many other jurisdictions) “diversity” appears
as a main goal, meaning – according to the Federal constitutional court – that diversity
of existing opinions should be presented in broadcasting as broadly and comprehensively
as possible. In consequence, Public service broadcasters are required to promote diversity,

19482

122

19482 – Diversity, Fairness, and Data-Driven Personalization in (News) Rec. Sys.

media regulators govern the distribution of broadcasting programs to maximize diversity.
The recent draft of an amended Interstate Treaty on Broadcasting tries to extend diversity
regulation to intermediaries. They should not discriminate among pieces of media content.
However, regulatory concepts reach their limits if they want to apply diversity regulation to
media in an information ecosphere where media content is just one among many types that
also fulfil information needs of the users.

3.6

Toward Measuring Viewpoint Diversity in News Consumption

Nava Tintarev (TU Delft, NL)
Creative Commons BY 3.0 Unported license
© Nava Tintarev
Main reference Dimitrios Bountouridis, Jaron Harambam, Mykola Makhortykh, Mónica Marrero, Nava Tintarev,
Claudia Hauff: “SIREN: A Simulation Framework for Understanding the Effects of Recommender
Systems in Online News Environments”, in Proc. of the Conference on Fairness, Accountability,
and Transparency, FAT* 2019, Atlanta, GA, USA, January 29-31, 2019, pp. 150–159, ACM, 2019.
URL http://dx.doi.org/10.1145/3287560.3287583
License

The growing volume of digital data stimulates the adoption of recommender systems in
different socioeconomic domains, including news industries. While news recommenders help
consumers deal with information overload and increase their engagement and satisfaction,
their use also raises an increasing number of societal concerns, such as “Matthew effects”,
“filter bubbles”, and an overall lack of transparency. Considerable recommender systems
research has been conducted on balancing diversification of content with relevance, however
this work focuses specifically on topical diversity. For readers, diversity of viewpoint on a
topic in news is however more relevant. This allows for measures of diversity that are multifaceted, and not necessarily driven by previous consumption habits. This talk introduced
preliminary work together with several Dutch news organizations (e.g., Blendle, Persgroep,
and FDMediagroep), aiming to find ways to help users explore viewpoint diversity. This talk
also explored transparency for content-providers, and introduced a simulation framework
that allows content providers to (i) select and parameterize different recommenders and
(ii) analyze and visualize their effects with respect to two diversity metrics. Consequently,
this talk introduced first steps toward informing diverse content selection in a way that is
meaningful and understandable, to both content providers and news readers.
References
1
Nava Tintarev, Emily Sullivan, Dror Guldin, Sihang Qiu, and Daan Odjik. “Same, same,
but different: algorithmic diversification of viewpoints in news”. In UMAP workshop on
Fairness in User Modeling, Adaptation and Personalization, in association with UMAP’18.
2018.
2
Dimitrios Bountouridis, Jaron Harambam, Mykola Makhortykh, Monica Marrero, Nava
Tintarev, and Claudia Hauff. “SIREN: a simulation framework for understanding the effects
of recommender systems in online news environments”. In ACM Conference on Fairness,
Accountability, and Transparency (FAT*). 2019.
3
Feng Lu and Nava Tintarev. “A diversity adjusting strategy with personality for music
recommendation”. In Recsys workshop on Interfaces and Decision Making in Recommender
Systems. 2018.

A. Bernstein, C. De Vreese, N. Helberger, W. Schulz, and K. A. Zweig

3.7

123

Measuring diversity in news recommendations – Or, at least, an
attempt

Sanne Vrijenhoek (University of Amsterdam, NL)
Creative Commons BY 3.0 Unported license
© Sanne Vrijenhoek
Joint work of Sanne Vrijenhoek, Nadia Metoui, Judith Möller, Daan Odijk, Natali Helberger
URL https://github.com/svrijenhoek/dart/tree/master/dart
License

The University of Amsterdam, in collaboration with RTL News and funded by the SIDN
Fonds, has started the development of an open source tool that enables data scientists at
media companies to measure diversity in their news recommendations. In this talk we describe
the setup of this project and the process of bridging the gap between normative notions of
diversity, founded in democratic theory, and computationally viable methods. We identified
a set of metrics approaching a subset of characteristics of different models of democracy, and
evaluate them by comparing performance between a set of baseline recommender approaches.
References
1
Helberger, Natali. “On the democratic role of news recommenders.” Digital Journalism
(2019): 1-20.

3.8

Computer science perspective: Measures as models of society

Katharina A. Zweig (TU Kaiserslautern, DE)
Creative Commons BY 3.0 Unported license
© Katharina A. Zweig
Main reference Katharina Anna Zweig: “Network Analysis Literacy – A Practical Approach to the Analysis of
Networks”, Springer, 2016.
URL https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-7091-0741-6
Main reference Isadora Dorn, Andreas Lindenblatt, Katharina A. Zweig: “The Trilemma of Network Analysis”, in
Proc. of the 2012 International Conference on Advances in Social Networks Analysis and Mining
(ASONAM 2012), ASONAM ’12, p. 9–14, IEEE Computer Society, 2012.
URL https://doi.org/10.1109/ASONAM.2012.12
License

The talk first reviewed the idea of using centrality indices in complex network analysis and
provided a solution of why there are so many of them. This is explained by a suggestion
of Borgatti who stated that for every network flow process there is one centrality index
that predicts which of the nodes is most heavily used by the network flow process. He
characterized network flow processes by only a few characteristics, e.g., the type of paths used
in the network or the distribution mode. Thus, each centrality index is tied to a network flow
process and vice versa. In other words, centrality indices contain a model of a social process
to which they can be applied to. This well-understood relationship between a certain class of
indices or measures and a social process can be generalized to all kinds of operationalizations
of social concepts, e.g., diversity of a news recommender system. If all measures and indices
that are supposed to quantify a social term contain a model of a social process or a cultural
perspective, it is 1) important to make these implicit assumptions as explicit as possible and
2) vital to only apply any measure to those kind of data and research questions that match
with the implicit assumptions.

19482

124

19482 – Diversity, Fairness, and Data-Driven Personalization in (News) Rec. Sys.

Participants
Christian Baden
The Hebrew University of
Jerusalem, IL
Michael Beam
Kent State University, US
Abraham Bernstein
Universität Zürich, CH
Claes De Vreese
University of Amsterdam, NL
Marc Hauer
TU Kaiserslautern, DE
Lucien Heitz
Universität Zürich, CH
Natali Helberger
University of Amsterdam, NL
Pascal Jürgens
Johannes Gutenberg-Universität
Mainz, DE

Christian Katzenbach
Institute for Internet & Society –
Berlin, DE

Guy Shani
Ben Gurion University –
Beer Sheva, IL

Benjamin Kille
TU Berlin, DE

Nava Tintarev
TU Delft, NL

Beate Klimkiewicz
University Jagiellonski –
Krakow, PL

Suzanne Tolmeijer
Universität Zürich, CH

Wiebke Loosen
Universität Hamburg, DE
Judith Möller
University of Amsterdam, NL

Wouter van Atteveldt
VU University Amsterdam, NL
Sanne Vrijenhoek
VU University Amsterdam, NL

Goran Radanovic
MPI-SWS – Saarbrücken, DE

Theresa Züger
Institute for Internet & Society –
Berlin, DE

Wolfgang Schulz
Universität Hamburg, DE

Katharina A. Zweig
TU Kaiserslautern, DE

