Near-Earth Water Sources: Ethics and Fairness✩
James S.J. Schwartz1,
Department of Philosophy, Wichita State University, USA

Abstract
There is a small finite upper bound on the amount of easily accessible water
in near-Earth space, including water from C-type NEAs and permanently
shadowed lunar craters. Recent estimates put this total at about 3.7×1012 kg.
Given the non-renewable nature of this resource, we should begin thinking
carefully about the regulation of near-Earth water sources (NEWS). This
paper discusses this issue from an ethical vantage point, and argues that for
the foreseeable future, the scientific use of NEWS should be prioritized over
other potential uses of NEWS.
Keywords: Lunar Resources; Asteroid Resources; Water; Ethics; Space
Policy
1. Introduction
According to a widely promulgated vision, the space environment offers
a cornucopia of resources, the utilization of which will help free us from the
kinds of destructive resource depletion that threaten our long-term well-being
here on Earth. The author has argued in other work (Schwartz and Milligan,
in preparation) that, at least as far as near-Earth space is concerned, this
Based on a presentation delivered at the 2nd COSPAR Symposium, Water and Life
in the Universe, November 2015, Foz do Iguaçu, Brazil. The author thanks those in
attendance for discussion and comments. Several of the ideas in this paper were contemporaneously developed by the author in a joint contribution with Tony Milligan, “Some
Ethical Constraints on Near-Earth Resource Exploitation” (in preparation in a future volume of Yearbook on Space Policy), which considers the policy implications of near-Earth
resource use more generally. Thanks to Tony Milligan and Colin McInnes for discussion,
and to an anonymous referee at Advances in Space Research for helpful suggestions.
Email address: james.schwartz@wichita.edu (James S.J. Schwartz)
✩

Preprint submitted to Advances in Space Research

April 13, 2016

vision is misguided. Although there is in-principle a large supply of useful
resources, our access to them is limited by a variety of physical and practical
constraints. Any especially valuable resources which might be exploited for
terrestrial consumption, e.g., platinum-group metals, are only likely to arrive
in a slow, staggered trickle. Thus, the exploitation of the resources of the
moon and NEAs is unlikely to eliminate terrestrial scarcity anytime soon, if
ever. The upshot is that regulation of near-Earth resource exploitation must
include measures to ensure the sustainability of these scarce resources.
This paper considers the policy implications specifically for the exploitation of water in near-Earth space. Although (and for good reason) seldom of
interest for its terrestrial uses, nevertheless water is a further example of the
claim that near-Earth space is resource poor. Recent estimates of the water
potentially available from lunar polar craters and from NEAs total to about
3% of the volume of Lake Nicaragua. Given the scarce and non-renewable
nature of this water supply, the author argues that any regulatory framework
for near-Earth water sources (NEWS) must aim to ensure more than mere
equitable access to NEWS—regulation moreover must actively appraise of the
overall ethical value of exploitation proposals so as not to lead to a situation
in which this scarce resource is wasted on trivial or frivolous objectives.
2. Water Near Earth
Aside from Earth itself, there are two major water sources in near-Earth
space. These are:
• Water potentially available in permanently-shadowed craters on the
lunar poles; and
• water available in the NEA population, primarily from C-type asteroids.
Though alternative NEWS exist, these two represent the most attractive
sources from an energy perspective, and thus the most likely sources of exploitation in the absence of distant, futuristic technology. How much water
are they likely to contain?
On the lunar surface there is somewhat greater than 31,000 km2 of permanently shadowed area (McGovern, Bussey, and Greehagen, et al., 2013). If
the entirety of this surface contains water ice at the concentrations measured
by LCROSS, then we should expect there to be approximately 2.9 × 1012
2

kg of water ice in permanently shadowed craters (Crawford, 2015, p. 146).
Although this is a considerable quantity of water when considered in isolation, nevertheless it is very meager when compared to many freshwater lakes
on Earth. For instance, this quantity amounts to approximately 0.013% (by
volume) of the water in the Great Lakes, or slightly less than 3% (by volume)
of the water in Lake Nicaragua.
Water in the NEA population needs to be considered somewhat more
carefully. Here the problem is not so much an estimation of the total quantity
of water in the NEA population but rather the total quantity of accessible
water. The simple fact is that not every asteroid is an attractive mining
candidate. Many require too much energy to intercept, capture, and return
to cislunar space; many are too small to justify mission costs; etc.1 Moreover,
the asteroid must be of the appropriate type for water extraction—principally
C-type.
A reasonable benchmark for energy costs would be the energy required for
lunar escape—thus a ∆v value of approximately 2.37 km/s for the return trip.
At this energy cost there is on the order of 1014 kg total of asteroid material
accessible (Sanchez and McInnes, 2013, p. 447). Sanchez and McInnes estimate that C-type asteroids comprise 10% of the NEA population, and that
we should expect these asteroids to contain, on average, 8% water by mass
(Sanchez and McInnes, 2013, p. 454). According to these estimates, then,
we should expect there to be somewhere around 8 × 1011 kg of water that
can be returned to cislunar space at lunar escape velocity—a significantly
smaller quantity of water than is potentially available on the lunar surface.
When these quantities are added together, the total quantity of water that
can be accessed in near-Earth space comes to only about 3.2% (by volume)
of the water in Lake Nicaragua (see Figure 1). A considerable quantity, to
be sure, but not considerable enough to forestall recognizing that water is
an especially scarce commodity in near-Earth space and that its exploitation
should be regulated carefully.
There are further constraints on NEA water extraction. First, not every Ctype asteroid included in the above mass-estimate will be massive enough—
i.e., contain enough water—to justify retrieval.2 Thus the figure of 8 × 1011
1

These concerns are well-explored in (Elvis, 2014).
(Elvis, 2014) estimates that a C-type asteroid must be at least 18 m in diameter to
justify the energy expense of capture and return, whereas the mass total identified in
(Sanchez and McInnes, 2013) includes asteroids of at least 1 m in diameter.
2

3

Figure 1: A visual comparison of the respective volumes of water in (from left to right) Lake
Nicaragua, total near-Earth water, lunar polar water, and C-type NEA water. Source:
James S.J. Schwartz.

kg should be thought of more as an upper bound on the water accessible
from NEAs, rather than as a lower bound. And second, even if NEAs can
be accessed at relatively low energy costs, capture and return missions must
be timed very carefully. Missions will in general have to be planned years in
advance, and in many cases they will take years to complete. The result will
not be a large influx of water into cislunar space, but rather a staggered, slow
trickle. For these reasons NEAs are, in general, both a less preferable and
a more tenuous source of water when compared to permanently shadowed
craters.
3. Fitness of Existing Policy
Assuming that NEWS exploitation will eventually take place, how adequately can existing regulatory frameworks accommodate the exploitation of
this especially scarce resource? The author raises this question not as one
concerning the legal status of space resource exploitation (such as under the
Outer Space Treaty (OST) or under the US Space Resource Exploration and
Utilization Act of 2015), which is much discussed in the literature. Rather,
the author raises this as a question about what amendments or modifications,
4

if any, would have to be made to existing treaties and regulatory frameworks
in order to provide for ethically sound NEWS exploitation. As the author
argues in this and the following section, existing policy focuses almost exclusively on the regulation of access to space resources (including NEWS),
whereas ethical considerations compel regulating the use of space resources—
especially in cases of resources that are very limited.
Existing regulatory and legal frameworks—at least those explored in the
context of space resources—tend to focus principally on access to space rather
than on for what purposes space resources are exploited and distributed. For
instance, many of the provisions of the Outer Space Treaty (OST) are focused
on access to space in the sense of outlawing activity that could interfere with
the operations of other states. Thus, for understandable historical reasons,
one finds in the OST a concerted effort to preserve space for “peaceful purposes.” But there is a broad array of activities that fall under the purview
of “peaceful purposes”—and it is not clear that just any non-belligerent use
of space resources (including NEWS) ought to be condoned.3 Unfortunately
there is little in the OST that would help us to arrive at refined decisions
about the wisdom of particular instances of NEWS exploitation (beyond the
general aim to protect the kind of negative liberties associated with free
access to space).
Somewhat more substantive and progressive is the ill-fated Moon Agreement, which includes provisions (Article 11, paragraphs 5-7) that would establish an international authority to regulate the exploitation of lunar resources. Among these provisions is that lunar resources must be managed
rationally. But what is meant by rational is never specified. One is left to
wonder for what purposes NEWS may be exploited rationally and for what
purposes NEWS exploitation would not be rational. Of course, Article 11
does further specify that there must be an equitable sharing of the benefits derived from lunar resources. Nonetheless this only tells us what must
happen economically once the resources have been sold; it does not tell us
for what purposes those resources may be used. So again it seems the concern is primarily access to space—here in the sense of access to the benefits
3

The OST is minimally aware of this in that Article I mentions the need to ensure
“freedom of scientific investigation in outer space” in particular. This, coupled with Article
II’s prohibition on appropriation of space resources, can be seen as placing a higher value
on science-based activities than on commercial activities in space. But to what degree the
OST would support the exploitation of NEWS even for scientific purposes is unclear.

5

of exploiting lunar resources—and at best only incidentally with how those
resources are to be consumed.
As a final example, the ITU orbital allocation regulations are explicitly
concerned with access to space, as identified in Article 44 of the ITU constitution:
. . . Member States shall bear in mind that radio frequencies and
any associated orbits, including the geostationary-satellite orbit,
are limited natural resources and that they must be used rationally, efficiently and economically, in conformity with the provisions of the Radio Regulations, so that countries or groups
of countries may have equitable access to those orbits and frequencies, taking into account the special needs of the developing
countries and the geographical situation of particular countries.
Moreover the ITU is concerned with little other than equitable access; beyond
international legal requirements it cares naught for what purposes orbital
allocations are used. For instance, were a corporation to successfully acquire
a launch license to place a commemorative statue of their liking in GEO or
some other orbit, the ITU could not cite the frivolousness of this proposal as
a justification to deny the application.
There is of course something laudable about legal and regulatory frameworks which aim to promote fair access to space. A regime which aims to
ensure this is, ceteris paribus, ethically superior to one which does not—the
author is by no means convicting the OST, the Moon Agreement, or the ITU
orbital allocation regulations of negligence or foul play. But it is a fair question, going forward, whether frameworks such as these are appropriate for
the regulation of especially scarce resources such as NEWS. There is likely
not enough water in near-Earth space for every state (or stakeholder) to acquire a useful share, thus it is not sufficient to seek merely to ensure fair
access to NEWS. What is needed is a substantive account of what rational
and equitable management of NEWS comprises. And since neither regulatory
framework offers this, neither can serve as a complete basis for the regulation of NEWS (and other scarce space resources).4 How might this kind of
4

Nor does the US Space Resource Exploration and Utilization Act of 2015 provide any
guidance here, since its principal aim is to encourage private space resource exploitation
subject to existing domestic and international legal obligations. Ethical considerations
and considerations of scarcity are mentioned nowhere in the text of the law.

6

lacunae then be filled?
4. Implications for Future Policy
Though the author shall not contemplate the construction of a full-fledged
regulatory framework for NEWS, he can at least relay a novel ethical element
that he believes would help fill the gap in extant policies identified above.
As a preliminary the author will provide a sketch of an underlying ethical
position from which the novel element is derived.
As Tony Milligan and the author have articulated on several prior occasions,5 John Rawls’ account of distributive justice (Rawls, 1971), though not
without its critics, nevertheless provides an attractive setting for developing
a more robust interpretation of concepts such as ‘rational’, ‘fair’, and ‘equitable’ for use in deliberation about space policy. Rawls’ basic insight is that
a fair or just distribution of goods is one that deliberators would agree to
under a condition of ignorance about their role in society. This would, Rawls
hoped, mitigate unjust biases in decisions about the distribution of basic
liberties and opportunities. Rawls’ anticipated outcome is that deliberators
would agree to a maximin policy, i.e., a policy where an unequal distribution
of goods would be justified only if it made the least-well-off better than under
a system of equal distribution.
As far as access to NEWS is concerned, a policy of equal access would
likely be infeasible for all. This is because it would leave each state (or each
stakeholder) with a very small quantity of easily accessible water—perhaps
so small as to preclude any significant development (pending subsequent
transactions between states). Thus we are left to contemplate what kind of
an unequal distribution of access to NEWS would leave each state better off
than under a policy of equal access.
Which nations, then, should be granted priority access to NEWS? One
answer would be that those nations most likely to develop the requisite capabilities for extracting water from NEWS should be given priority access,
e.g., China, Russia, and the United States. But this seems hardly equitable
or fair—rather, it seems likely to exacerbate existing space inequalities—the
opposite of what is desired under a Rawlsian conception of distributive justice. And nor does a policy of first-come, first-served seem likely to serve
wider interests.
5

(Schwartz, 2015); (Milligan, 2015); (Schwartz and Milligan, in preparation).

7

The author fears that the issue as framed cannot be resolved productively.
In fact, the author thinks that the question of who ought to be given access to
what portion of NEWS is something of a red herring. Instead, it is submitted
that our focus should be on for what purposes would-be exploiters plan to
use water from NEWS. That is, it is crucial, ethically speaking, to consider
the wider objectives that NEWS exploitation might help to satisfy. If indeed
NEWS will not provide enough water to satisfy the objectives of all states or
all stakeholders, then it is important to develop means for identifying which
objectives are most worthy of support. And it is plausible that this realization could be the result of a round Rawlsian deliberation under a condition
of ignorance about one’s identity as a nation or stakeholder—deliberators
would agree that it would be irrational to waste scarce resources such as
NEWS on trivial or frivolous purposes. Deliberators should agree that some
system must be devised for assessing the relative merits of NEWS exploitation proposals. Thus, any ethically sound NEWS exploitation regime must
incorporate assessment of the overall ethical worth of NEWS exploitation
objectives.
One way of conducting this assessment is to determine whether and to
what degree NEWS exploitation could help satisfy ethical duties. Fortunately, there has already been fruitful discussion about the various ways in
which space activities in general might help us carry out our ethical obligations. Duties commonly identified here include:
1. The duty to ensure long-term human survival;
2. the duty to improve human material well-being; and
3. the duty to gain knowledge about Earth and the solar system.
If our goal were to establish in full generality which duty weighs most strongly
on us, then the answer would most likely be (1)—the duty to ensure longterm human survival. But this is not quite our goal, which is rather to
determine which duty weighs most strongly on us during the period that we
can expect the majority of NEWS exploitation to occur—say, over the next
century. And during this time there is very little that the exploitation of space
resources could do to mitigate existential threats on the home planet (e.g.,
climate change), which will require largely or wholly terrestrial solutions. It
moreover strains credulity to suggest that NEWS exploitation in particular
could help alleviate existential threats on the home planet. If we have so
carelessly managed our water supply on the surface that it becomes necessary
to supplement this supply with water from NEWS, then it is doubtful we will
8

survive much longer to enjoy this negligible increase in water. Thus, as far
as NEWS exploitation is concerned, objectives which aim only to satisfy (1)
should be rated as very low priority objectives.
But what can be said a propos of comparing (2) and (3)? As the author has argued previously (Schwartz, 2014), there is room to doubt that
the exploitation of near-Earth resources will significantly improve the wellbeing of average human beings. There are several reasons for this: First, it
seems likely that the majority of such exploitation will take place in support
of space-based consumption (unless our economic situation changes drastically). This point is especially salient with respect to NEWS, since it is
rather difficult to imagine a situation in which it becomes prudent to export
water from near-Earth space to Earth’s surface. Second, as mentioned in §2,
the time horizon for the exploitation of these resources is significant. Though
transfers between the Earth and moon may be on the order of days, NEA
capture and redirect missions generally have to be planned years in advance
and will often take years to complete once initiated. Thus there will likely
never be a “gold rush” for water in near-Earth space—water will only come
in a slow, staggered trickle. Thus, even if NEWS were exploited for terrestrial profit, the amount of material exploited would be marginal, at best,
resulting in equally marginal economic payoffs. It is simply unlikely that
NEWS exploitation will in any clear or direct way lead to tangible material
improvements in the lives of average humans.
By contrast, the exploitation of NEWS could offer tangible benefits to
space science. The prospect of being able to utilize space-based water (among
other resources available in near-Earth space) could drastically reduce the
launch mass necessary to support ambitious human exploration missions. In
this way NEWS exploitation could enable space science much more effectively
than it could enable improved human well being. Thus, even if the duty to
acquire knowledge about the solar system is comparatively weaker than the
duty to improve human well being, the scales may balance in favor of space
science when the effectiveness of NEWS exploitation is considered. Thus we
can readily imagine situations in which we should prioritize (3) over (2) for
NEWS exploitation.
Some precedent for prioritizing scientific interests concerning resource use
comes from the Antarctic Treaty and its instruments, which include comparatively active mechanisms for updating policies and procedures in light of

9

new scientific information and new technological capabilities.6 An obvious
starting point for space would be to expand COSPAR’s already considerable
role in this arena by recognizing it as a major—if the not the principal —
stakeholder in discussions about the regulation of NEWS (and other space
resource) exploitation. Either through existing panels (e.g., the COSPAR
Panel on Planetary Protection (PPP) and the Panel on Potentially Environmentally Detrimental Activities in Space (PEDAS)), or through the formation of an ad hoc panel, COSPAR could serve as an adjuvant to forms
of regulation that might compromise important science objectives related to
NEWS (and other space resources). And, if the author’s position in this
paper is correct, it would be ethically appropriate for COSPAR to engage in
such activities.
The question arises naturally as to what quantity or portion of water
from NEWS should be reserved for scientific purposes. The answer depends
largely on which scientific objectives should be pursued and on how much
water will be required in order to pursue these objectives. Extant exploration
roadmaps can provide us with some guidance about mission destinations
and desired outcomes, and thus, can help us to produce estimates about the
quantities of water from NEWS that missions might require. For instance,
among the exploratory goals identified in (Ehrenfreund, McKay, Rummel,
et al., 2012) are robotic missions to nearly every destination in the solar
system, as well as crewed missions to NEOs, the Moon, cislunar space, Mars,
etc. Two important pieces of information are insufficiently clear at present.
First, it is not clear how many missions (crewed or otherwise) it will be
desirable to send to particular destinations. And second, it is not clear what
magnitude of resources, including any water from NEWS, will be needed for
each mission. Obviously, precise estimates of science’s water requirements
cannot be made without this information. Moreover, exploration roadmaps
and goals are dynamic—what is perceived as important science varies over
time. Thus even if we were to produce reasonable estimates of the water
needs for extant roadmaps, that would not determine the water needs for
science in 15, 20, 50, etc. years into the future, when even more ambitious
objectives might be pursued, such as crewed missions to the Asteroid Belt,
the Jovian system, and the outer solar system. Thus, in order to provide for
6

See (Kerrest, 2011) and (Race, 2011) for useful comparisons of the OST and the
Antarctic Treaty.

10

the sustainable conduct of space science (insofar as it depends on water from
NEWS), it would be desirable for an organization such as COSPAR to supply
NEWS regulators with information about the water needs of science on an
ongoing basis, with these estimates corresponding directly to the portion of
NEWS that should be preserved for scientific use.7
5. Conclusion
The above is only a sketch of some ethical considerations that the author
believes would improve deliberation about NEWS exploitation policy. Thus
the author does not pretend to have offered the final say on matters, since
neither our capabilities nor our desired uses of space will remain fixed over
sufficiently long periods. Nevertheless the author would insist that sensitivity to the objectives served by exploitation—largely absent from existing
policy—must be an enduring feature of any ethically salient NEWS regime
(or, for that matter, of any ethically salient exploitation regime for space
resources more generally). Though there may be perennial debate about
the comparative importance of space objectives, we cannot tolerate a system
that allows scarce near-Earth water to be used for wasteful and frivolous
objectives.
References
Crawford, I.A., Lunar Resources: A Review, Progress in Physical Geography,
39, 137-167, 2015.
Elvis, M., How Many Ore-bearing Asteroids?, Planetary and Space Science,
91, 20-26, 2014.
Ehrenfreund, P., McKay, C., Rummel, J., et al., Toward a Global Space
Exploration Program: A Stepping Stone Approach, Advances in Space
Research, 49, 2-48, 2012.
7

A possible way in which this information could impact regulation would be for estimates about water needs, in conjunction with water production rates, to inform a variablerate tax on NEWS exploitation, the levying of which either contributes water directly to a
“science reserve,” or contributes money to a fund that purchases water for science needs.

11

Kerrest, K., Outer Space as International Space: Lessons from Antarctica,
Science Diplomacy: Antarctica, Science, and the Governance of International Spaces, edited by Paul Arthur Berkman, Michael A. Lang, David
W.H. Walton, and Oran R. Young, 133-142, Smithsonian Institution Scholarly Press, 2011.
McGovern, J., Bussey, D., Greenhagen, B., et al., Mapping and Characterization of non-Polar Permanent Shadows on the Lunar Surface, Icarus, 223,
566-581, 2013.
Milligan, T., Rawlsian Deliberation About Space Settlement, Human Governance Beyond Earth—Implications for Liberty, edited by Charles Cockell,
9-22, Springer, 2015.
Race, M., Policies for Scientific Exploration and Environmental Protection:
Comparison of the Antarctic and Outer Space Treaties, Science Diplomacy:
Antarctica, Science, and the Governance of International Spaces, edited by
Paul Arthur Berkman, Michael A. Lang, David W.H. Walton, and Oran
R. Young, 143-152, Smithsonian Institution Scholarly Press, 2011.
Rawls, J., A Theory of Justice (Cambridge, MA: Belknap Press), 1971.
Sanchez, J., McInnes, C., Available Asteroid Resources in the Earth’s Neighbourhood, Asteroids: Prospective Energy and Material Resources, edited
by Viorel Badescu, 439-458, Springer, 2013.
Schwartz, J., Prioritizing Scientific Exploration: A Comparison of the Ethical
Justifications for Space Development and for Space Science, Space Policy,
30, 202-208, 2014.
Schwartz, J., Fairness as a Moral Grounding for Space Policy, The Meaning
of Liberty Beyond Earth, edited by Charles Cockell, 69-89, Springer, 2015.

12

