CONVERGENCE

PRINCIPLES OF ACCURACY, FAIRNESS AND
PRIVACY UNDER A NEW CODE
Mark Briedis
Communications Law Centre, UTS
William Renton
Communications Law Centre, UTS

Recent reports into regulation of the media recommend the creation of a ‘news standards body’ to
oversee news providers and to create a new code. The new code should be founded on the public
interest. It is an opportunity to recognize and entrench the legitimate interests of those affected by
the presentation of news material. The fairness of news information should be based on the
accuracy of the implied facts of news material. News providers will have freedom of speech in
presenting opinion, but will be discouraged from presenting inaccurate material. With respect to
privacy, the new code should strike a proper balance between the public interest in receiving
information and the rights of the individual. The test for privacy invasion should be based upon
the reasonable expectation of privacy.

INTRODUCTION
In February 2012, the Report of the Independent Inquiry into the Media and Media Regulation
(‘Finkelstein report’) was presented to Government, followed a month later by the Convergence
Review: Final Report (‘Convergence report’). Both reports recommend that a single body should
be responsible for the regulation of news and current affairs material on all platforms.
The Finkelstein report recommends that such a body should be an independent, Governmentfunded, statutory body, responsible for the creation of standards and with the authority to impose
non-financial sanctions (such as the requirement to print adjudications and corrections).
The Convergence report recommends legislation requiring news providers that qualify as
‘content services enterprises’ to become members of a ‘news standards body’ that is adequately
funded by industry, has a board with a majority of independent directors, and has the authority to
refer non-compliant members to the new communications regulator (as outlined by the
Convergence report) (CR 2012: 51). The body would have ‘the power to order members to
prominently and appropriately publish its findings’ (CR 2012: 51). This power would derive
from contractual arrangements with members. The report also recommends that the ‘news
standard body’ should be responsible for:
The establishment of standards for the production of news and commentary, including
specific requirements for fairness and accuracy…
Therefore, whatever approach Government decides to adopt, the new body is likely to play a key
role in establishing the fundamental principles for the professional conduct of news providers.
This article provides a brief analysis of the existing codes and regulatory systems, and puts
forward the recommendations of the Communications Law Centre (CLC) with respect to a new
code, focusing on the principles of accuracy, fairness and privacy.

PRINCIPLES OF ACCURACY, FAIRNESS AND PRIVACY UNDER A NEW CODE

42.1
______

TWO REGULATORY SYSTEMS
The Australian Communications and Media Authority (ACMA) is currently responsible for
regulatory oversight of broadcasting content, including news and current affairs material.
Broadcasting codes are developed by industry in consultation with the ACMA, in line with
public interest objects in Section 3 of the Broadcasting Services Act 1992:
(g) to encourage providers of commercial and community broadcasting services to be
responsive to the need for a fair and accurate coverage of matters of public interest and
for an appropriate coverage of matters of local significance; and
(h) to encourage providers of broadcasting services to respect community standards in
the provision of program material.
The ACMA has enforcement powers with respect to these codes. The press, on the other hand, is
subject to industry self-regulation. The Australian Press Council (APC), an incorporated
association funded by its members, creates standards that are applied in considering complaints
about member publications. The role of the APC is outlined in its Constitution:
(1) The objects of the association are to promote freedom of speech through responsible
and independent print media, and adherence to high journalistic and editorial standards,
by
(a) considering and dealing with complaints and concerns about material in
newspapers, magazines, journals and other print media;
(b) encouraging and supporting initiatives by the print media to address causes
for readers’ complaints and concerns.
The APC, as a body independent of government, has no direct responsibility to any party other
than its own members, whose interests it represents by encouraging high standards of
professional conduct.
The new ‘combined’ body, while also independent of government, is likely to have certain
functions defined by statute – for example, those recommended by the Convergence Review
Committee with respect to remedies and sanctions. In addition, the prescribed basis of the news
standards body should be closely considered and include a requirement to develop codes and
regulate news material in the public interest.

WHAT ARE THE PRINCIPLES?
The existing codes express similar requirements, such as the need for fairness and accuracy, and
the need to respect privacy. While these requirements are expressed as ‘principles’, they do not
have their origins in common law or statute. Further, no system of precedent attaches to the
codes to allow for the development of principle over time.
While this poses a challenge, it also creates an opportunity to design a code that operates clearly
in the public interest, and that recognizes the legitimate interests of parties affected by the
presentation of news material. Table 1 outlines some of those interests and related concerns.

TELECOMMUNICATIONS JOURNAL OF AUSTRALIA, VOLUME 62, NUMBER 3, 2012 SWINBURNE UNIVERSITY OF TECHNOLOGY

42.2
_____

The public

Legitimate interests
Integrity of public debate and
functioning of democracy

Individuals

Reputation and privacy

Businesses

Reputation and need for
accurate commercial
information

Groups

Reputation

Background
Opinion may be freely expressed. However, inaccurate
speech is circumscribed by different laws and the
principles that apply to broadcasters and the press.
· Defamation law provides a remedy for individuals
prepared to risk legal proceedings.
· Article 12 of the Universal Declaration of Human
Rights protects both privacy and reputation.
· Privacy receives piecemeal protection via a number of
separate torts and the Privacy Act 1988 (Cth)(which
relates to information privacy).
· Information providers (including media organisations)
enjoy a safe harbour from the application of trade
practices law.
· There is a public benefit in the provision of accurate
information about businesses.
· Racial groups are protected by the Racial
Discrimination Act 1975 (Cth) and State and Territory
anti-discrimination laws.
· Any individual who identifies themselves as belonging
to a group has an interest in that group being correctly
portrayed.
· Accurate information about groups benefits social
cohesion and tolerance.

Table 1 - Parties with an interest in the regulation of news material.

PRINCIPLES OF ACCURACY AND FAIRNESS
The connection between accuracy and fairness is reflected in a number of the codes, but
nowhere are the terms defined. Some codes, such as the UK’s Editors’ Code of Practice (UK
code) (Beales 2012) and the Commercial Radio Codes of Practice (commercial radio code)
(Commercial Radio Australia 2011) refer only to accuracy and not to fairness.
The Oxford English Dictionary provides the following definitions of ‘accurate’:
1. correct in all details; exact. accurate information about the illness is essential to an
accurate assessment;
2. providing a faithful representation of someone or something: the portrait is an accurate
likeness of Mozart.
These definitions emphasise different things: detail and the overall picture. This difference in
emphasis is apparent in the existing codes that apply to news providers
Australian Press Council
principles
· Publications should take
reasonable steps to ensure
reports are accurate, fair and
balanced. They should not
deliberately mislead or
misinform readers either by
omission or commission.
(General Principle1)
· News and comment should
be presented honestly and
fairly, and with respect for the

Editors’ Code of Practice 2012
(UK)
· The Press must take care not to
publish inaccurate, misleading or
distorted information, including
pictures. (Clause 1)
· The Press, whilst free to be
partisan, must distinguish clearly
between comment, conjecture
and fact. (Clause 1.3)

PRINCIPLES OF ACCURACY, FAIRNESS AND PRIVACY UNDER A NEW CODE

Media Alliance Code of Ethics
· Report and interpret honestly,
striving for accuracy, fairness
and disclosure of all essential
facts. Do not suppress relevant
available fact, or give distorting
emphasis. Do your utmost to give
a fair opportunity of reply.
(Clause 1)

42.3
______

privacy and sensibility of
individuals. (General Principle
4)
Herald and Weekly Times
Editorial Code of Conduct
· Facts must be reported
impartially, accurately and
with integrity.
· Try to always tell all sides of
the story in any dispute.
· Do not knowingly withhold
or suppress essential facts.
· Journalists should not rely on
only one source. Be careful
not to recycle an error from
one reference source to
another. Check and check
again. (Clause 1)

2010 Commercial Television
Industry Code of Practice
· [L]icensees: must broadcast
factual material accurately and
represent viewpoints fairly,
having regard to the
circumstances at the time of
preparing and broadcasting the
program;
· An assessment of whether the
factual material is accurate is to
be determined in the context of
the segment in its entirety.
(Clause 4.3.1)
· In broadcasting news programs
(including news flashes)
licensees: must present news
fairly and impartially. (Clause
4.4.1)

Commercial Radio Codes of
Practice (2011)
· In the preparation and
presentation of current affairs
programs, a licensee must use
reasonable efforts to ensure that:
Factual material is reasonable
supportable as being accurate.
(Clause 2.1)
· In the preparation and
presentation of current affairs
programs a licensee must ensure
that… Reasonable efforts are
made or reasonable opportunities
are given to present significant
viewpoints when dealing with
controversial issues of public
importance, either within the
same program or similar
programs, while the issue has
immediate relevance to the
community. (Clause 2.3)

Table 2 - Accuracy and fairness in the existing codes.

ACCURACY
The codes in Table 2 express the need for accuracy in different ways. The codes for the Herald
and Weekly Times (HWT), the UK, commercial television and commercial radio refer to the
accuracy of facts, factual material and information – emphasising exactness of detail. On the
other hand, the APC requires publications to ensure reports are accurate, and the Media
Entertainment and Arts Alliance (MEAA) requires journalist members to [r]eport and interpret
honestly, striving for accuracy – emphasising accuracy as ‘faithful representation’.

FAIRNESS
The APC and the MEAA connect the words accuracy and fairness in their codes, suggesting that
the two ideas form the same principle. The HWT code meanwhile states that facts must be
reported with integrity. The codes for commercial television and commercial radio with respect
to current affairs programs do not refer to fairness, but to viewpoints. The commercial television
code requires licensees to represent viewpoints fairly, whereas the commercial radio code has a
requirement that reasonable opportunities are given to present significant viewpoints when
dealing with controversial issues of public importance – a provision intended to achieve balance.
The HWT code and the commercial television code also refer to impartiality. On commercial
television, the need for impartiality refers to the presentation of news on news programs and in
news flashes, whereas the HWT code relates impartiality to the reporting of fact. However,
opinion and analysis, integral features of news reporting, are inherently partial, and so it is
difficult to interpret the need for impartiality beyond a need for accuracy.
The same problem exists with the use of the word fair in the APC code, which states that
publications are to ensure that reports are accurate, fair and balanced. This does not seem to

TELECOMMUNICATIONS JOURNAL OF AUSTRALIA, VOLUME 62, NUMBER 3, 2012 SWINBURNE UNIVERSITY OF TECHNOLOGY

42.4
_____

state the principle correctly, as it also ignores the place of opinion in the presentation of news
material – and opinion, more or less, is free.
The UK code, on the other hand, states openly that the press is ‘free to be partisan’, so long as it
is accurate and ensures the distinction between fact, comment and conjecture.

A NEW APPROACH TO ACCURACY AND FAIRNESS
The Need For Principles To Evolve

Currently, decisions by the APC or the ACMA do not create precedent or develop principle. The
problem with this approach is that vague and uncertain ideas, such as fairness and accuracy,
remain vague and uncertain. The CLC recommends that the news standards body should develop
key principles, over time, through written decisions, in order to provide greater certainty. In
doing this, it should maintain the distinction between genuine principle and prescriptive rules.
Separation Of Accuracy And Fairness

Accuracy and fairness, while related, should be treated as separate concerns. Accuracy (defined
as ‘faithful representation’) should be protected on the basis that the public has a legitimate
interest in receiving accurate information. A separate set of principles that relate to fairness of
news information (or harmful misrepresentation) should be developed which establish specific
duties not to cause harm to legitimate interests through inaccurate news material.
Accuracy And Fairness Relate To Fact

It should be clearly stated in the new code that accuracy and fairness relate only to fact, and not
to comment.
Accuracy Test

To provide a sound basis for investigations, an accuracy test should be developed by the new
standards body to be applied in investigations into complaints about accuracy and fairness.

THE ACCURACY TEST
There are many ways in which news material can mislead, such as through the omission of key
facts in a news story, through exaggeration and distortion, through providing unreasonable
viewpoints uncritically, and through the presentation of comment or opinion as fact. All of the
codes take some of these practices into account.
Rather than attempt to identify all the different practices that may lead to a person being misled,
the better approach is to consider each case in terms of implied fact. The news standards body
may wish to be guided by the approach of the courts in defamation cases in which juries are
tasked with finding the meaning of defamatory imputations. Under this approach, the ‘natural
and ordinary’ meaning of news material should be applied as understood by the ordinary
reasonable person.
To reduce concern about the potential of bias, it would be better for the public members of the
news standard body to take on the role of finding implied facts in news material. A ‘statement of
implied fact’ would provide the inflexible basis upon which principle is applied. The statement
of implied fact should also be provided to news organisations in order to allow an opportunity
for response.
Alongside the implied facts, it would be necessary for an assessment to be made about the real
circumstances upon which news material is based, in order to consider the implied facts for
accuracy.

PLATFORM
In its submission to the Convergence Review, the CLC recommended that media content
regulation should be applied consistently across media and platforms (CLC 2011). This makes
PRINCIPLES OF ACCURACY, FAIRNESS AND PRIVACY UNDER A NEW CODE

42.5
______

sense as content is now made available on multiple platforms. However, a platform-neutral code
has another benefit in that it enables the development of principles based purely on the ethical
considerations of content and its external impacts. Another implication is that each investigation
by the news standards body will have industry-wide relevance, which will be important for the
effectiveness of the news standards body in responding to community concerns about the
conduct of the media.
Case study. Applying the accuracy test to ‘comment’
A newspaper article describes a new government initiative to release up to 100 asylums seekers per
month into the community. The headline reads Revealed: Boat people to flood our suburbs.
What is fact? What is comment?
This headline has elements of fact: a number of asylum seekers will be released into the community
under a government proposal. The headline implies another fact: that the number released will have
a negative impact on the community. The headline also expresses an opinion: that the community
should fear the release of asylum seekers.
The distinctions between fact and comment expressed here are a matter of interpretation. Another
reader may have a different view about what constitutes fact and comment. As such, it is better to
disregard considerations of what constitutes comment, and focus on implied fact.
The accuracy test
The news standards body would look at the words of the headline and article in terms of the implied
fact. Opinion itself is not at issue, except to the extent that fact is implied.
In this case, an ordinary reasonable person might judge the implied fact to be that the number of
asylum seekers released will be ‘so large that it will have an overwhelming negative impact on the
community’.
In order to apply the principle of accuracy, the news standards body should consider additional facts.
For instance, under which circumstances would it be accurate to say that the release of asylum
seekers would have an overwhelming negative impact on the community?
Drawn from APC Adjudication No.1529, 30 April 2012

ETHICAL CONSIDERATIONS OF FAIRNESS AND ACCURACY
Finding accuracy serves a number of ends. Firstly, news providers have a relationship of trust
with the public in providing information. Unless the matter is trivial, accuracy is worth
protecting in its own right. Secondly, accuracy provides the factual basis for determining
whether news material is fair to those affected by that material.
From an ethical perspective, however, less harm is caused by news material found to be merely
inaccurate compared with news material that is both inaccurate and unfair. It is, therefore,
necessary to consider how these breaches would be addressed by the new code.
Publishing Corrections And Adjudications

The requirement to publish an adjudication or correction is the means by which the facts, as
found by the news standards body, can be laid bare. In the case of mere inaccuracy, this allows
the public to understand a better version of the facts. In such a case, the requirement to publish
need not be regarded as a judgment upon the performance of the news provider. In fact, the
willingness to provide corrections is likely to improve public trust in news organisations.
In cases involving unfairness, publication of the facts puts the public in the position of the news
standards body, and allows members of the public to form their own opinions about the fairness
or unfairness of the news provider. The public response to the news provider, and the subsequent
erosion of trust, creates the sanction.
The news standards body should also make it clear when a finding is made on the grounds of
fairness. Fairness, and the conduct of the news provider in presenting news material, should also

TELECOMMUNICATIONS JOURNAL OF AUSTRALIA, VOLUME 62, NUMBER 3, 2012 SWINBURNE UNIVERSITY OF TECHNOLOGY

42.6
_____

be the basis for any additional action, such as the decisions to refer the news provider to a
statutory body.

FAIRNESS OF NEWS INFORMATION
‘Fairness of news information’ relates to the negative impact of inaccurate news content on the
reputation of individuals, groups and businesses, and on the integrity of debate on matters of
public concern. These interests receive piecemeal protection in the existing codes. Legal
protection with respect to trade practices and data privacy is also limited due to exemptions
enjoyed by media organisations. The absence of legal protection creates a greater need for
responsible conduct on the part of media organisations, which should be met in a new code.
Further, certain ‘vulnerable’ groups – such as asylum seekers, teenagers or the unemployed – do
not have rights with respect to how they are portrayed by the media, which creates an ethical
responsibility to portray these groups accurately.

WHEN IS NEWS INFORMATION UNFAIR?
News information is unfair when it has the effect of diminishing reputation, image or respect for
an individual, group, business or public policy.

INDIVIDUALS
Under defamation law, a person succeeds in a case against a publisher of defamatory material
where that material cannot be shown to be true. However, not all complainants are willing, or
can afford, to pursue defamation in the courts. The reputation of an individual is not specifically
recognized or protected by any relevant code in Australia, and must rely on general code
provisions that require accuracy and fairness.
One reason for entrenching protection of reputation in a new code is to establish the news
standards body as a viable alternative to the courts. A properly applied standard for the
protection of reputation would have the potential to save media organisations from significant
legal expenses, as well as providing remedies to individuals in the form of published
adjudications, corrections and replies.

GROUPS
The APC General Principle 8 states:
Publications should not place any gratuitous emphasis on the race, religion, nationality,
colour, country of origin, gender, sexual orientation, marital status, disability, illness, or
age of an individual or group.
Similar provisions with respect to ‘gratuitous emphasis’ exist in other codes.
Gratuitous emphasis, however, is unlikely to cover all examples of unfairness to groups. It is
important that whenever a group is the focus of a news item that the group is fairly and
accurately portrayed.

PRINCIPLES OF ACCURACY, FAIRNESS AND PRIVACY UNDER A NEW CODE

42.7
______

Case study
A newspaper article states: ‘Shocking new figures show adolescent crime in Ballarat has nearly
doubled in the past five years, with approximately one in four teenagers aged 15 to 17 committing
offences.’
The article is subsequently found to have misinterpreted police statistics, which provide the total
number of offences committed by young people, not the proportion of young people who committed
offences.
Issues: the interests of many groups are not formally recognized by the existing codes and people who
identify with a group are vilified by inaccurate reporting.
Drawn from APC Adjudication No. 1512, September 2011

BUSINESSES
Misleading information about a business has the ability to inflict serious economic and
reputational damage. Defamation law does not extend to businesses that have ten or more
employees, and the media safe-harbour in trade practices law creates an exemption, inclusive of
news providers, for misleading and deceptive conduct. The exemption exists to prevent a
chilling of free speech with respect to reporting on businesses and business activities. This ‘legal
vacuum’ creates a need for an improved ethical requirement.
The CLC recommends that the news standards body should be authorised to refer news
providers that fail to meet their ethical responsibilities with respect to businesses to the
Australian Competition and Consumer Commission (ACCC). Consideration should also be
given to amending the Competition and Consumer Act 2010 to enable the application of
‘misleading and deceptive conduct rules’ to news providers who are referred to the ACCC.
Case study
A series of newspaper reports make incorrect and misleading claims about the costs associated with
connecting to the National Broadband Network (NBN).
An adjudication by the Australian Press Council in December 2011 expresses the concern that:
…within a short period of time three articles on the same theme contained inaccurate or misleading
assertions. It considers that this sequence of errors should not have occurred and that they should have
been corrected promptly and adequately when brought to the newspaper’s attention.
Issues: businesses rely on general provisions of fairness and accuracy. The media safe-harbour is also
open to abuse, and the requirement to publish adjudications and corrections is unlikely to be an adequate
remedy or sanction. Public/private enterprises are particularly vulnerable as there is a political incentive to
report inaccurate information.
Drawn from APC Adjudication No.1515, December 2011

PUBLIC POLICY
While media organisations should continue to be free to express opinion about public policy,
they also ought to ensure accuracy. The implied freedom of political communication, as
established by the High Court, holds that there ought to be free discussion of matters of political
concern.
It is also important that the information underlying public debate should be accurate and truly
stated, as this impacts upon the ability of citizens to construct informed opinions, which in turn
influences government policy and how people vote.
TELECOMMUNICATIONS JOURNAL OF AUSTRALIA, VOLUME 62, NUMBER 3, 2012 SWINBURNE UNIVERSITY OF TECHNOLOGY

42.8
_____

The need for accurate information in public debate also relates to the ‘marketplace of ideas’ – a
theory that it is better to allow free competition in ideas in order that, over time, the best ideas
and policies emerge. To this, it should be added, the marketplace of ideas is more likely to be
effective where the creators of those ideas are required to strive for accuracy.

APPLYING THE ACCURACY TEST TO FAIRNESS OF NEWS INFORMATION
In determining whether news material is unfair it is necessary to consider whether it is
inaccurate. The accuracy test when applied to the fairness of news information should consider
accuracy in terms of the impact of misinformation upon reputation, image or respect.

CONDUCT OF NEWS PROVIDERS NOT RELEVANT TO FAIRNESS AND ACCURACY
A number of codes express the need for accuracy or fairness in terms of the reasonable conduct
of the news provider. In other words, the question is not whether a news item is prima facie
accurate, but whether there is a reasonable attempt at ensuring accuracy.
This approach is explained in the UK’s Editors’ Codebook:
The Code is careful not to demand perfect accuracy, which would be impossible to
achieve. Instead, [the Code] obliges publications to take care not to publish inaccurate,
misleading or distorted material, including pictures. That is a simple, practical and
deliverable requirement, applying to all they do ahead of publication. If sufficient care
were taken, then that would be a defence to any subsequent complaint. (Editors’
Codebook 2012, 16)
This reflects the imperfect reality – the fact that mistakes happen. The good intention of the
news providers is, however, irrelevant to victims of unfair news material. Principles of
inaccuracy or unfairness should be judged solely according to content. Where inaccuracy is
found to exist, it should be corrected as a matter of course, and where news material is found to
be unfair it should be acknowledged as being unfair.
While findings of accuracy and fairness must apply to content, the conduct of news
organisations in presenting news material should determine the extent to which a news provider
may be considered to be ‘accountable’.

ACCOUNTABILITY AND THE REGULATION OF NEWS MATERIAL
A separate code provision should provide a non-exhaustive list of criteria with respect to
‘responsible journalism’. This list should include the extent to which the publishing of particular
news material is in the public interest and the efforts of the news provider in checking the
accuracy of information.
Any decision on fairness and accuracy should also include a statement based on the provision for
responsible journalism that makes clear whether the news provider was justified in presenting
news material. Such a finding would be relevant to any further action the news standards body
may wish to take, such as referring a news provider to a statutory body.
Recommendations:
• The news standards body should have a public interest role under statute.
• Accuracy should be understood to mean ‘faithful representation’.
• The news standards body should be open to developing key principles over time.
• Accuracy and fairness should be regarded as separate principles.
• Accuracy and fairness should only relate to fact.
• An accuracy test should be developed based on the ‘implication of fact’.
• The public members of the news standards body should be responsible for implying the facts of
news material.
• Separate principles of fairness of news information should protect the interests of those affected
PRINCIPLES OF ACCURACY, FAIRNESS AND PRIVACY UNDER A NEW CODE

42.9
______

•

by news material.
The new standards body should be authorised to refer news providers that breach ethical
responsibilities towards businesses to the ACCC.

PRIVACY
Privacy is a broad concept, often characterised as a collection of rights, which includes the right
to seclusion, personal information and personal affairs. In Australia, there is no right to privacy
under law. Separate rights with respect to privacy exist under the torts of nuisance, trespass and
confidentiality, and information privacy is protected by the Privacy Act 1988. The High Court in
Australian Broadcasting Commission v Lenah Game Meats Pty Ltd (2001) 208 CLR 199
(‘Lenah’) opened the door for the development of a tort of privacy, and a statutory tort for
‘serious invasion of privacy’ is now the subject of review by the Commonwealth Government.
While media organisations are subject to the law of the land with respect to separate privacy
concerns, they enjoy an exemption from the application of the National Privacy Principles
(NPPs) outlined in the Privacy Act, which includes the requirement of organisations to collect
personal information ‘only by lawful and fair means’ (NPP1.2), and to inform people about the
purposes for which information is collected (NPP1.3).

PRIVACY UNDER EXISTING CODES
The absence of legal protection creates an ethical responsibility that should be catered for in the
new code.
While all the code provisions presented in Table 3 recognise a general right to privacy, none
offer a definition of ‘privacy’. The codes do, however, refer variously to ‘private grief’, the
‘sensibilities of individuals’, ‘personal and private affairs’ and respect for ‘private and family
life, home, health and correspondence’.
The general rule under the codes is that the privacy of an individual is protected except when
publication of material is in the public interest. A number of these codes offer the same
definition of ‘public interest’. The UK code is different in that it lists elements included within
the ‘public interest’, such as detecting or exposing crime.
There are three main questions that must be addressed in considering a new code:
1. When is there an invasion of privacy?
2. How should the public interest be defined?
3. How should the balance be struck in applying the public interest?
Australian Press Council
principles
News and comment should be
presented honestly and fairly,
and with respect for the privacy
and sensibilities of individuals.
However, the right to privacy is
not to be interpreted as
preventing publication of
matters of public record or
obvious or significant public
interest. Rumour and
unconfirmed reports should be
identified as such. (General
Principle 4)
……
"Public interest"

Editors’ Code of Practice 2012
(UK)
• Everyone is entitled to respect
for his or her private and family
life, home, health and
correspondence, including
digital communications.
• Editors will be expected to
justify intrusions into any
individual's private life without
consent. Account will be taken
of the complainant's own public
disclosures of information.
• It is unacceptable to
photograph individuals in
private places without their
consent. (Clause 3)

Media Alliance Code of Ethics
Respect private grief and
personal privacy. Journalists
have the right to resist
compulsion to intrude. (Clause
11)

TELECOMMUNICATIONS JOURNAL OF AUSTRALIA, VOLUME 62, NUMBER 3, 2012 SWINBURNE UNIVERSITY OF TECHNOLOGY

42.10
_____

For the purposes of these
principles, "public interest" is
defined as involving a matter
capable of affecting the people
at large so they might be
legitimately interested in, or
concerned about, what is going
on, or what may happen to
them or to others.

[note: these provisions are
balanced against the public
interest]

Herald and Weekly Times
Editorial Code of Conduct
All individuals, including
public figures, have a right to
privacy. Journalists have no
general right to report the
private behaviour of public
figures unless public interest
issues arise. The right to
privacy diminishes when the
suitability of public figures to
hold office or perform their
duties is under scrutiny and
such scrutiny is in the public
interest.
“Public interest” is defined for
this and other clauses as
involving a matter capable of
affecting the people at large so
they might be legitimately
interested in, or concerned
about, what is going on, or what
may happen to them or to
others. (Clause 4.1)

2010 Commercial Television
Industry Code of Practice
In broadcasting news and
current affairs programs,
licensees…must not use
material relating to a person’s
personal or private affairs, or
which invades an individual’s
privacy, other than where there
is an identifiable public interest
reason for the material to be
broadcast. (Clause 4.3.5)

Public interest
• The public interest includes,
but is not confined to:
> Detecting or exposing crime
or serious impropriety.
> Protecting public health and
safety.
> Preventing the public from
being misled by an action or
statement of an individual or
organisation.
• There is a public interest in
freedom of expression itself.
• Whenever the public interest is
invoked, the PCC will require
editors to demonstrate fully that
they reasonably believed that
publication, or journalistic
activity
Commercial Radio Codes of
Practice (2011)
In the preparation and
presentation of current affairs
programs a licensee must ensure
that:…the licensee does not use
material relating to a person’s
personal or private affairs, or
which invades an individual’s
privacy, unless there is a public
interest in broadcasting such
information. (Clause 2.3(d))

Table 3 - How existing codes deal with privacy.

WHAT IS THE PRINCIPLE OF PRIVACY?
The broad scope of privacy is well-recognized. As Gleeson CJ stated in Lenah, ‘there is no
bright line that can be drawn between what is private and what is not’ (Lenah 2001: 42). He
suggested a ‘useful practical test’: namely, that what is private can be found by considering
whether conduct would be ‘highly offensive to a reasonable person of ordinary sensibilities’
(Lenah 2001: 42). Rather than attempt to exhaustively define the concept of privacy, the new
PRINCIPLES OF ACCURACY, FAIRNESS AND PRIVACY UNDER A NEW CODE

42.11
______

code should apply a test, similar to the one referred to by Gleeson, to determine privacy on a
case-by-case basis.
By adopting this test, industry would be held accountable to a broad principle of privacy,
capable of evolving over time, and there would be no need for a piecemeal set of prescriptive
rules such as currently exists under various codes (see Table 3). However, principle stated this
broadly would require an additional framework to ensure a level of certainty.
Jessie Porteus’ submission to the review on the statutory privacy tort recommends eleven factors
to be taken into account when considering whether an invasion of privacy has occurred (Porteus
2012). A number of these factors should be included in the body of the new code in order to
establish relevant considerations for the application of the principle. The factors include:
•
•
•
•

•
•
•

the nature of the material (the more sensitive, the more care must be taken);
the nature of the conduct (the more intrusive, the more care must be taken);
whether the material is essential to explain the substantive issues in the story;
whether the material directly or indirectly contributes to the audience’s capacity to
assess an issue of importance to the public, and its knowledge and understanding of the
subject;
the extent of the subject’s public profile;
the extent of the subject’s vulnerability; and
whether consent has been given (including implied consent).

HOW SHOULD ‘PUBLIC INTEREST’ BE DEFINED?
There have been many attempts over the years to define ‘public interest’. Rather than attempt to
define the public interest, it is probably more instructive to provide indications of its scope. The
ACMA’s Privacy Guidelines for Broadcasters (‘ACMA privacy guidelines’) state that public
interest issues include:
…public health and security; criminal activities; corruption; misleading the public;
serious anti-social behaviour; politics; government and public administration; elections;
and the conduct of corporations, businesses, trade unions and religious organisations.
(ACMA 2011)
This list should be included in a new set of guidelines to be developed by the news standards
body. The guidelines should also provide examples of issues that are not in the public interest:
for instance, the personal lives of celebrities.
Applying The Public Interest In Relation To Privacy

In the privacy provisions listed in Table 3, the ‘public interest’ relates to the benefit to the public
in receiving news material. However, it should be acknowledged that privacy is also a public
interest concern. The new code should take into account all public interest concerns, and not just
consider privacy against the public interest in receiving news information.

STRIKING THE BALANCE BETWEEN PRIVACY AND PUBLIC INTEREST
The existing codes do not appear to strike the balance evenly between the privacy of the
individual and the public interest in receiving news information. For example, the commercial
television code states that privacy must not be invaded other than where there is an identifiable
public interest reason for the broadcast. This formulation, echoed in the commercial radio code
and the APC code, may be described as a ‘threshold’ test – once public interest is established
with respect to news material, any invasion of privacy is acceptable. This approach ignores both
the degree to which the news material is in the public interest and the extent to which privacy is
invaded.
The ABC Code of Practice emphasises balance. It states:
TELECOMMUNICATIONS JOURNAL OF AUSTRALIA, VOLUME 62, NUMBER 3, 2012 SWINBURNE UNIVERSITY OF TECHNOLOGY

42.12
_____

Intrusion into a person’s private life without consent must be justified in the public
interest and the extent of the intrusion must be limited to what is proportionate in the
circumstances.
The CLC recommends that the principle of privacy under a new code should be similar to the
ABC code in being even-handed in its treatment of competing interests.

THE NEED FOR A COMMON SET OF GUIDELINES
Compliance with the privacy principle in the new code is likely to be greatly improved if news
providers have well developed guidelines on which to base their decisions. The guidelines would
assist in describing the public interest, and demonstrate how the requirement for privacy is likely
to be applied in different situations. The ACMA’s privacy guidelines are a useful template that
provides a number of case studies (ACMA 2011). The guidelines should evolve over time and
include practical guidance on expected conduct with respect to:
•
•
•
•
•
•

the collection and use of people’s private information;
understanding when consent has been given;
photographing people in private places;
the privacy rights of public figures;
hidden surveillance and subterfuge; and
harassment.

Recommendations:
• The new code should strike a proper balance between the right to privacy and the public
interest in news information.
• The test for invasion of privacy should be based upon the reasonable expectation of privacy.
• Factors relevant to the test for invasion of privacy should be included in the body of the code.
• The news standards body should develop privacy guidelines to help news providers comply
with their obligations under the new code.

CONCLUSION
The creation of the news standards body is an opportunity to take a look at how news material
has been regulated in the past and how it ought to be regulated in the future. Creating a new code
requires the development of principles that apply equally on all platforms. The new code must
be founded on the public interest and ought to entrench the legitimate interests of those parties
affected by the presentation of news material. The fairness of news information should be based
on accuracy as determined by the implied facts of news material. This approach will allow news
providers freedom of speech in presenting opinion, but discourage the inaccurate and unfair
presentation of fact. The new code should also improve the level of privacy protection by
striking a proper balance between the public interest in receiving information and the right of the
individual to privacy. The question of privacy invasion should be based upon the reasonable
expectation of privacy, clarified by a list of relevant factors.

PRINCIPLES OF ACCURACY, FAIRNESS AND PRIVACY UNDER A NEW CODE

42.13
______

REFERENCES
ACMA. 2011. Australian Media and Communications Authority, Privacy Guidelines for
Broadcasters. December 2011. Available at
http://www.acma.gov.au/webwr/_assets/main/lib100084/privacy_guidelines-dec2011.pdf
Australian Press Council. 2011-12. ‘Adjudications and other outcomes’.
http://www.presscouncil.org.au/adjudications-other-outcomes/.
Beales, I. 2012. The Editors’ Codebook. The handbook to the Editors’ Code of Practice. UK:
The Newspaper Publishers Association, the Newspaper Society, the Periodical Publishers
Association, and the Scottish Newspaper Society. Available at
http://www.editorscode.org.uk/downloads/codebook/codebook.pdf
Commercial Radio Australia. 2011. Codes of Practice and Guidelines. Septemebr 2011.
Available at
http://www.commercialradio.com.au/files/uploaded/file/Commercial%20Radio%20Codes%
20&%20Guidelines%20%205%20September%202011.pdf
Communications Law Centre. 2011. Submission to Convergence Review – Framing Paper (6.7).
Available at
http://www.dbcde.gov.au/__data/assets/pdf_file/0011/143003/University_of_Technology_S
ydney_UTS_-_Discussion_Papers.pdf
Convergence Review Committee. 2012. Convergence Review: Final Report. Available at
http://www.dbcde.gov.au/digital_economy/convergence_review
Finkelstein, Hon R; Ricketson, Prof. M. 2012. Report of the Independent Inquiry into the
Media and Media Regulation. Available at
http://www.dbcde.gov.au/digital_economy/independent_media_inquiry
Lenah. 2001. Australian Broadcasting Commission v Lenah Game Meats Pty Ltd (2001) 208
CLR 199.
Porteus, Jessie. 2012. ‘Submission to Commonwealth Government review: A Commonwealth
Statutory Cause of Action for Serious Invasion of Privacy’.

Cite this article as: Briedis, Mark; Renton, William. 2012. ‘Principles of accuracy, fairness and
privacy under a new code’. Telecommunications Journal of Australia 62 (3): 42.1-42.14. Available
from: http://tja.org.au.
TELECOMMUNICATIONS JOURNAL OF AUSTRALIA, VOLUME 62, NUMBER 3, 2012 SWINBURNE UNIVERSITY OF TECHNOLOGY

42.14
_____

