Author's personal copy
J Bus Ethics
DOI 10.1007/s10551-014-2357-7

The Face of Fairness: Self-Awareness as a Means to Promote
Fairness among Managers with Low Empathy
David B. Whiteside • Laurie J. Barclay

Received: 4 February 2014 / Accepted: 5 September 2014
! Springer Science+Business Media Dordrecht 2014

Abstract Although managing fairness is a critical concern for organizations, not all managers are predisposed to
enact high levels of fairness. Emerging empirical evidence
suggests that personality characteristics can be an important antecedent of managers’ fair behavior. However, relatively little attention has been devoted to understand how
to promote fairness among managers who are naturally
predisposed to engage in lower levels of fairness. Building
upon self-awareness theory, we argue that increasing
managers’ self-awareness can motivate managers with low
trait empathy to engage in greater levels of justice. We test
the interactive effects of trait empathy and state selfawareness using an experimental study (N = 76) in which
individuals were asked to communicate negative news. In
support of our hypothesis, our results indicate that
increasing self-awareness through self-focusing situations
can help promote interactional justice when communicating negative news for individuals with low trait empathy.
The theoretical and practical implications of these findings
are discussed.
Keywords

Fairness ! Justice ! Empathy ! Self-awareness

These men ask for just the same thing—fairness, and fairness only—
Abraham Lincoln

Given the pervasive and beneficial effects of enacting
fairness in organizations (for meta-analytic reviews, see
D. B. Whiteside (&) ! L. J. Barclay
School of Business & Economics, Wilfrid Laurier University, 75
University Avenue West, Waterloo, ON N2L 3C5, Canada
e-mail: whit6090@mylaurier.ca
L. J. Barclay
e-mail: lbarclay@wlu.ca

Colquitt et al. 2001, 2013; Rupp et al. 2014), it is critical to
understand the factors that can prevent managers from
engaging in fair behaviors and how these obstacles can be
overcome. Emerging empirical evidence suggests that
personality characteristics can play an important role in
managers’ enactment of fairness. Patient and Skarlicki
(2010), for example, demonstrated that managers with low
levels of empathy engage in fewer fair behaviors toward
their subordinates than managers with high empathy. The
notion that personality characteristics can naturally predispose some managers to engage in lower levels of fairness is concerning since having a reduced tendency or
motivation to enact fairness can not only prevent individuals from adhering to standards of fairness, but it can also
result in more frequent and severe violations of fairness (cf.
Ambrose and Schminke 2009a). This raises the question of
how fair behaviors can be promoted, especially for managers who are predisposed to engage in lower levels of
fairness.
Building upon self-awareness theory (Duval and
Wicklund 1972; Wicklund 1975), we argue that increasing
managers’ self-awareness can provide one avenue by
which managers with low trait empathy can be motivated to
engage in higher levels of fairness. Consistent with
research by Patient and Skarlicki (2010), we argue that trait
empathy will be positively related to managers’ enactment
of fairness. However, we propose that increasing managers’ self-awareness through self-focusing situations (i.e.,
situations where one views the self as an object to be
evaluated; e.g., seeing a video of oneself, looking into a
mirror) can overcome the effects of low empathy on fairness. This is because states of self-awareness can trigger
comparisons between one’s current behavior and standards
of normative behavior (Duval and Wicklund 1972). Fairness is one example of such standards—that is, people

123

Author's personal copy
D. B. Whiteside, L. J. Barclay

generally believe that they should be fair and want to
perceive of themselves as fair people (Diekmann et al.
1997; Lerner 1971; Messick et al. 1985). By increasing the
salience of normative standards, we argue that states of
self-awareness can motivate managers to ‘‘shape up’’ their
behavior and act more in line with general standards of
justice.
We aim to make at least two contributions to the literature. First, despite the importance of managing fairness,
justice researchers still know relatively little about the
factors that can promote fairness in the workplace (cf. Scott
et al. 2009). Building upon research by Patient and Skarlicki (2010), we examine trait empathy as an important
antecedent of fair behavior. Understanding the role of
personality characteristics in the enactment of fairness can
deepen our understanding of who will be most likely to
enact fairness in organizations as well as identify managers
who may benefit from fairness interventions. Second, we
examine self-awareness as a possible contextual intervention to help promote fairness among managers with low
trait empathy. We argue that situating managers in selffocusing situations can increase the salience of fairness
standards and motivate managers with low trait empathy to
treat employees fairly. Thus, we explore how to promote
managerial fairness as well as identify new points of
intervention to manage fairness in the workplace.
We examine this research question by exploring individuals’ enactment of fairness when delivering bad news to
others. We focus on the delivery of bad news since justice
issues are particularly prominent in the context of negative
outcomes (Greenberg 2001). As a result, it is especially
important that managers deliver bad news to employees in
a way that conveys dignity as well as respect and includes
an adequate explanation (Bennett et al. 1995). However,
managers are often motivated to disengage from their
employees in these situations as a form of self-protection
and can fail to treat employees with interpersonal sensitivity (Folger and Skarlicki 2001; Margolis and Molinsky
2008; Molinsky and Margolis 2005). This suggests that
delivering bad news is a context where fairness is particularly important, but difficult to promote. Moreover, we
focus on individuals’ enactment of interactional justice
(i.e., the extent to which managers treat employees with
sensitivity and provide an adequate explanation of outcomes; Bies and Moag 1986) since interactional justice is
the most open to managers’ discretion compared to the
other justice dimensions (Scott et al. 2009) and it is particularly important when communicating negative news to
employees (Bennett et al. 1995).1 In the interests of
1

Although interactional justice is sometimes further separated into
interpersonal and informational justice (e.g., Colquitt 2001), we
examine interactional justice for a number of reasons. From a

123

simplicity, we use the terms interactional justice and fair
behavior interchangeably from this point forward.

Theoretical Background
Communicating negative news in a fair manner is an
important issue facing managers. Treating employees fairly
is associated with a wide range of beneficial outcomes for
employees (e.g., trust, job satisfaction) and organizations
(e.g., performance, commitment; for meta-analytic
reviews, see Cohen-Charash and Spector 2001; Colquitt
et al. 2001, 2013; Rupp et al. 2014). However, there are a
number of reasons why managers may fail to treat
employees fairly when communicating negative news. For
example, managers may be motivated to disengage from
their employees in these situations as a form of self-protection (Margolis and Molinsky 2008; Molinsky and
Margolis 2005) or because they do not want to invest the
effort, time, and resources required to engage in fairness
(Folger and Skarlicki 1998, 2001).
Recent research has demonstrated that increasing managers’ justice motivation can play an important role in
promoting fairness (Ambrose and Schminke 2009a; Cornelis et al. 2013; Korsgaard et al. 1998; Patient and Skarlicki
2010; Scott et al. 2007). Specifically, managers who are
motivated to engage in fairness are more likely to initiate
and persist in fairness efforts (Ambrose and Schminke
2009a; Scott et al. 2009). Although the motivation to enact
fairness can be enhanced in a number of ways, managerial
empathy has been shown to be important within the context
of communicating negative news (Patient and Skarlicki
2010).
Empathy is defined as an individual’s ‘‘sensitivity to the
emotional experiences of another’’ (McNeely and Meglino
1994, p. 837) and refers to the psychological process that
allows an individual to experience feelings that are congruent with the situation of another person (Hoffman
2000). We examine empathy as a dispositional characteristic; that is, individuals’ general capacity to empathize
with others (i.e., trait empathy; Davis 1994). This is in
contrast to state empathy (i.e., temporary and targeted
feelings of warmth and compassion toward another person;
Davis 1994). We focus on trait empathy because we are
Footnote 1 continued
theoretical perspective, interpersonal and informational justice are
closely related, and both dimensions have the same hypothesized
effects in this context. Thus, interactional justice provides a more
parsimonious explanation. From an empirical perspective, our results
also indicated that interpersonal and informational justice were highly
correlated (r = 0.73). Finally, interactional justice has been used
extensively in recent research, and our approach is consistent with
these studies (e.g., Ambrose and Schminke 2009b; Barclay and
Kiefer, in press; Barsky and Kaplan 2007; Spencer and Rupp 2009).

Author's personal copy
Effects of Empathy and Self-Awareness on Fair Behavior

interested specifically in how to increase feelings of fairness among managers who are characteristically low on
empathy since these individuals are particularly likely to
engage in lower levels of fairness on an ongoing/consistent
basis.
Trait empathy can play an important role in the enactment
of fairness because it can increase the perceived importance
of justice, particularly when communicating negative outcomes to others. Specifically, research on empathy has
demonstrated that people high on trait empathy are better
able to understand the full effect of negative outcomes on
others because they are able to put themselves in the shoes of
those experiencing the negative outcome (Davis 1994). That
is, when delivering negative news, managers who demonstrate high levels of empathy should have a better understanding of how recipients of negative news will react and
how harmful the news may be than managers who demonstrate low levels of empathy (Blader and Tyler 2001; Patient
and Skarlicki 2010). This is important in the context of
fairness because justice issues become more important as
negative outcomes become more prominent (Blader and
Tyler 2001; Greenberg 2001). This suggests that engaging in
fairness when communicating negative outcomes should be
particularly important for highly empathic managers
because they can better understand how harmful the news
will be to employees and know that they should communicate the news in a fair manner in order to minimize the harm
caused by the news. In support of this effect, Patient and
Skarlicki (2010) demonstrated that among managers completing a layoff scenario task, trait empathy was positively
related to the enactment of fairness. Taken together, we
argue that trait empathy will motivate individuals to engage
in higher levels of interactional justice when communicating
bad news because it can increase the importance of justice
issues.
In the interests of fairness promotion, however, it is
important to also outline potential avenues by which managers with low trait empathy can be motivated to engage in
higher levels of fairness. We argue that managers’ state selfawareness may provide one answer. Specifically, managers
with low trait empathy can be motivated to adhere to
standards of justice when states of self-awareness are activated because these states can highlight the importance of
adhering to normative standards such as fairness. Thus, we
propose that self-awareness may promote fair behaviors,
particularly for individuals who are predisposed to engage
in lower levels of fairness.
Overcoming Low Empathy: The Role of SelfAwareness
Self-awareness is a motivational state that occurs when
one’s attention is focused exclusively on the self as an

object to be evaluated. Duval and Wicklund (1972) outlined two forms of self-awareness: (1) ‘‘objective selfawareness’’ (i.e., when attention is focused on the self) and
(2) ‘‘subjective self-awareness’’ (i.e., when attention is
directed away from the self and toward external objects).
For the purposes of this paper, we focus on objective selfawareness (i.e., all references to ‘‘self-awareness’’ refer to
objective self-awareness from this point forward).
According to self-awareness theory (Duval and Wicklund 1972), states of self-awareness can be activated by any
stimuli in one’s environment that focus one’s attention on
the self. For example, seeing a video of oneself or simply
looking into a mirror. In turn, the activation of selfawareness can trigger automatic self-evaluations—or
comparisons between the self and standards of normative
behaviors, attitudes, and traits (Duval and Wicklund 1972;
Wicklund 1975). Specifically, these standards represent an
individual’s perception of how they should behave given a
certain set of circumstances (i.e., standards of fairness;
Folger 1998, 2001).
The motivational crux of self-awareness theory revolves
around the likelihood that during this process of selfevaluation, perceived discrepancies will be identified
between one’s current behavior and standards of normative
behavior (Duval and Wicklund 1972). The existence of
such discrepancies will motivate self-aware individuals to
respond in one of two ways. On the one hand, they may
‘‘ship out’’ by removing the stimuli that triggered the selffocused attention (e.g., not looking into the mirror). This
approach may be especially likely if there is a simple and
effective way to avoid self-awareness. However, self-aware
individuals may also ‘‘shape up’’ and attempt to reduce the
discrepancy by changing their behavior such that it is more
consistent with standards of normative behavior. This
response may be particularly likely if individuals cannot or
do not want to avoid the self-focusing stimuli. Moreover,
these motivational effects can also be proactive. Gibbons
(1990) suggests that self-awareness can motivate individuals to inhibit the creation of discrepancies by avoiding
behaviors that are inconsistent with the standards that they
hold. In this sense, standards can be prescriptive in that
they indicate what a person should do in order to attain
standards of correctness.
Previous empirical research has supported these effects.
For example, Batson et al. (1999) demonstrated that selfawareness increased the likelihood that individuals would
assign another participant to a desirable task instead of
themselves when this behavior was framed as the most
‘‘morally right’’ way to assign tasks. In a similar vein,
Vallacher and Solodky (1979) demonstrated that individuals who were made self-aware were less likely to cheat on
puzzle problems if standards of morality were prioritized
over standards of competence. Taken together, this

123

Author's personal copy
D. B. Whiteside, L. J. Barclay

research supports the notion that by increasing the salience
of normative standards, states of awareness can also
motivate proactive moral behavior.
We argue that self-awareness can also enhance individuals’ motivation to ‘‘shape up’’ to standards of fairness.
Specifically, as mentioned above, the activation of selfawareness triggers a self-evaluation between one’s behavior and the standards one holds about how they should
behave (Duval and Wicklund 1972) and can motivate
individuals to avoid behaviors that are inconsistent with the
standards that they hold (Gibbons 1990). Fairness represents one example of a commonly held standard of ideal
behavior. For example, fairness is often framed as a moral
virtue and an important standard of how one should act,
whereas violations of fairness are regarded as transgressions against standards of moral behavior (Folger 1998,
2001; Folger and Cropanzano 1998, 2001). Consistent with
this approach, research has demonstrated that fairness is a
desired social identity (Greenberg 1990). That is, most
people believe that they should be fair and generally want
to perceive themselves as fair people (Diekmann et al.
1997; Lerner 1971; Messick et al. 1985) and want others to
perceive them as fair (Greenberg 1990). This suggests that
when individuals are made self-aware, they should be
motivated to engage in greater levels of fairness in order to
reduce the likelihood that discrepancies will emerge
between their own behavior and the standards of fairness
that they hold. That is, self-awareness can activate standards of fairness to indicate how one should act in order to
attain a desired identity of fairness. On the other hand, in
the absence of self-awareness, standards of fairness should
be less salient, and the motivational drive to ‘‘shape up’’
and avoid discrepancies between one’s behavior and standards of fairness should be less intense (Gibbons 1990). In
support of these effects within a justice context, Greenberg
(1980) demonstrated that self-awareness can increase
individuals’ equity behavior, especially when individuals
see themselves as responsible for performance differences
between them and a competitor. We expand upon these
findings by exploring these effects in the context of interactional justice and the extent to which self-awareness can
promote fairness among individuals with low trait
empathy.
The Interaction of Trait Empathy and Self-Awareness:
Activating Standards of Justice
We argue that trait empathy will interact with self-awareness to predict fairness such that individuals with high trait
empathy will have high levels of fairness regardless of selfawareness whereas self-awareness will increase fair
behaviors for individuals with low trait empathy. In other
words, when individuals are not made self-aware, we

123

hypothesize that the relationship between trait empathy and
interactional justice will be positive. This is because
greater levels of empathy should increase the importance of
justice issues when communicating negative news to others
(Blader and Tyler 2001). That is, individuals with higher
trait empathy should demonstrate a greater motivation to
communicate negative news in a fair manner in order to
minimize the harm felt by the employee (Patient and
Skarlicki 2010). When individuals are made self-aware,
however, we hypothesize that the positive relationship
between trait empathy and self-awareness will be tempered
such that interactional justice is consistently high across all
levels of trait empathy. Specifically, by increasing the
salience of standards of justice, self-awareness can motivate individuals with low trait empathy to ‘‘shape up’’ to
standards of justice and communicate negative outcomes
with a greater level of interactional justice. In other words,
we argue that increasing individuals’ self-awareness can
overcome the effects of low trait empathy on interactional
justice.
Hypothesis 1 Trait empathy and self-awareness will
interact to predict interactional justice such that the relationship between trait empathy and interactional justice
will be positive when self-awareness is low, but tempered
when self-awareness is high.

Method
Participants and Procedure
Participants (N = 77) were recruited from a North American university and received course credit for participating
(51 % male, average age = 20.21 years, average work
experience = 3.57 years). Participants completed a feedback task adapted from Patient and Skarlicki (2010). The
task was organized into two parts. First, participants were
asked to grade a mock GMAT test that had been completed
by an ostensible participant in a previous study session.
The test was organized into four multiple-choice sections
(reading comprehension, sentence correction, algebra, and
geometry) and one qualitative writing question. Participants were provided with a marking rubric and asked to
grade the test. All participants were provided with an
identical test in which the test-taker performed poorly.
Specifically, the test-taker failed the reading comprehension and algebra sections (a score of 1/5 in each section),
barely passed the sentence correction and geometry sections (a score of 3/5 in each section), and had a flawed
qualitative response. To put these scores in context, participants were told that most MBA programs would automatically reject any applicant with a GMAT score less than

Author's personal copy
Effects of Empathy and Self-Awareness on Fair Behavior

70 %. By marking the test themselves, participants had a
detailed understanding of the test-taker’s strengths and
weaknesses as well as which areas needed improvement.
Second, after grading the test, participants were asked to
provide the test-taker with feedback on their test performance. Participants were told that their feedback would be
given to the test-taker in the third stage of the study the
following week and were asked to ‘‘provide your feedback
in the way that you feel is most appropriate.’’ To increase
the perceived importance of the task, participants were told
that ‘‘all of the students in the previous stage of this study
are interested in applying for MBA programs and participated in this study as an actual opportunity to prepare
themselves for the format of the GMAT exam and receive
feedback on their performance.’’ Using open-ended questions at the end of the study, we asked participants to
provide an explanation of what they thought the study was
about and what the researchers were trying to examine. An
examination of these responses indicated that participants
did not question the authenticity of the feedback task.
Participants were randomly assigned to either a high
self-awareness condition or a low self-awareness condition. In the high self-awareness condition, participants
provided the test-taker with video feedback using a webcam program on a laptop that mirrored their image on the
computer screen as they recorded the feedback. That is,
participants faced their own image as they recorded their
feedback as if they were looking into a mirror. In the low
self-awareness condition, participants used a laptop to
record audio feedback (i.e., participants in the low selfawareness condition were not faced with their own image
as they recorded their feedback). To minimize potential
anxiety about being identified, all participants were told
that the test-taker would only receive a text-based transcription of their feedback and they would not be identifiable in any way through the feedback provided. One
participant was excluded from the data for not correctly
following the study instructions. Thus, our final sample
consisted of 76 participants. After the feedback task was
completed, participants responded to our measures,
including the manipulation check and demographics.

Table 1 Means, standard deviations, reliabilities, and correlations
Mean

SD

1

2

3

1. Trait empathy

3.85

0.56

(0.85)

2. Self-awareness

0.50

0.50

0.12

(–)

3. Interactional justice
(coded)

3.07

0.93

0.11

0.44**

(0.95)

Reliabilities (Cronbach’s alpha) are shown on the diagonal in
parentheses, where applicable
Self-awareness is coded: 1 high self-awareness, 0 low self-awareness
** p \ 0.01

Interactional Justice
Following procedures from Patient and Skarlicki (2010),
interactional justice was content-coded using transcribed
versions of participants’ feedback. Two coders, who were
blind to the participants’ condition, independently assessed
interactional justice using six criteria, including the extent
to which the communicator: (a) was polite, (b) treated the
test-taker with respect, (c) treated the test-taker with dignity, (d) refrained from improper remarks, (e) provided a
clear explanation of the test results, and (f) explained the
test results thoroughly (cf. Colquitt 2001). All items were
coded using a 5-point Likert-type scale ranging from 1 (not
at all) to 5 (very much so). We focused on criteria that were
most applicable to the feedback context (e.g., we did not
include the timing of the feedback since participants did
not have control over this criterion). Both coders’ scores
were averaged for each item, and the final interactional
justice scale was calculated using the mean of these scores.
The correlation between the coders’ scales was 0.94.
Trait Empathy was measured using the empathy subscale
of the Cloninger Temperament and Character Inventory
(TCI; 8-items; e.g., ‘‘In general, I feel others’ emotions,’’ ‘‘In
general, I am concerned about others’’; Cloninger et al.
1994). Unlike other empathy scales (e.g., Davis 1980), this
scale does not contain fairness-related items that may confound empathy with our dependent measure (fairness).

Results
Measures
Unless otherwise indicated, participants responded on a
5-point Likert-type scale ranging from 1 (not at all) to 5
(very much so). Items were averaged to form the measures.
Manipulation Check
We measured self-awareness with one item from Govern
and Marsch’s Situational Self-Awareness Scale (2001; ‘‘I
am conscious of my inner feelings’’).

Descriptive statistics, correlations, and reliabilities are
displayed in Table 1. Before testing our hypothesis, we
examined our manipulation check. Results indicated that
our self-awareness manipulation was effective; participants
in the high self-awareness condition reported being significantly more self-aware (M = 4.05, SE = 0.11) than
participants in the low self-awareness condition
(M = 3.61, SE = 0.11), F(1, 75) = 9.09, p \ 0.01.
To test our hypothesis, we conducted hierarchical
regression and simple slopes analyses (cf. Aiken and West

123

Author's personal copy
D. B. Whiteside, L. J. Barclay
Table 2 Summary of hierarchical regression analysis
Predictor

Interactional Justice
B

SE

a

b

95 %
Lower
bound CI

95 %
Upper
bound CI

Step 1
Trait empathy

0.10

0.18

0.06

-0.26

0.45

Self-awareness

0.79

0.20

0.43**

0.40

1.19

Trait empathy

0.54

0.24

0.32*

0.06

1.02

Self-awareness

0.73

0.19

0.40**

0.35

1.11

Trait
empathy 9
self-awareness

-0.88

0.34

-0.37*

-1.56

-0.20

Step 2

*p \ 0.05; ** p \ 0.01
a

Step 1: R2 = 0.19, p \ 0.01; Step 2: R2 = 0.26, DR2 = 0.07,
p \ 0.05
5

Interactional Justice

4.5
4
3.5
3
2.5
2

Low Self-Awareness

1.5

High Self-Awareness

1
Low Trait Empathy

High Trait Empathy

Fig. 1 The interactive effects of trait empathy and self-awareness on
interactional justice

1991). The variables were entered in the following steps:
(1) the main effects (trait empathy and self-awareness) and
(2) the interaction term between trait empathy and selfawareness. Trait empathy was mean-centered to minimize
multicollinearity (Cohen et al. 2003). Full results are displayed in Table 2 and Fig. 1. Results indicated that trait
empathy and self-awareness significantly interacted to
predict interactional justice (b = -0.37, p \ 0.05). Simple
slopes analyses revealed that the relationship between trait
empathy and interactional justice was positive when individuals were not made self-aware (b = 0.39, p \ 0.01),
but was not significant when individuals were self-aware
(b = -0.20, p = 0.21). Hypothesis 1 was supported.

General Discussion
Promoting fairness is a critical issue within organizations.
By integrating research on trait empathy and self-

123

awareness theory (Duval and Wicklund 1972), we tested an
interactionist model of fairness to examine self-awareness
as one contextual factor that can promote fairness among
managers who may be naturally predisposed to lower
levels of fairness (i.e., managers with low levels of trait
empathy). In support of our hypothesis, our findings demonstrate that increasing individuals’ self-awareness through
self-focusing situations can help promote interactional
justice, particularly among individuals with low trait
empathy. These findings have a number of theoretical and
practical implications.
Our findings provide further support for the important
role of empathy in managers’ fair behavior. Consistent with
Patient and Skarlicki (2010), we found that in the absence
of self-awareness, trait empathy was positively related to
the enactment of fairness. This provides further evidence
that empathy can increase the importance of justice issues
and motivate managers to enact higher levels of fairness,
especially when communicating negative outcomes to
employees. However, our results demonstrate that the
effects of low empathy can be overcome by increasing
individuals’ self-awareness. That is, by activating standards
of justice through other means (i.e., self-awareness),
organizations can motivate managers with low trait
empathy to engage in higher levels of fairness, which are
comparable to highly empathic managers. We argue that
this occurs because states of self-awareness can increase
the importance of meeting fairness standards and provide
managers with low trait empathy with the motivation to
‘‘shape up’’ their behavior and act more in line with those
standards. Moving forward, it is important to explore how
other personality and contextual factors interact to promote
fairness, particularly among managers who may be predisposed to lower levels of fairness. By doing so, justice
researchers can create more effective interventions that can
promote fairness across a wide range of managers and
situations.
These findings also demonstrate that managers’ selfawareness can be an important antecedent for justice
behaviors. Specifically, our results suggest that activating
states of self-awareness through self-focusing situations
can enhance managers’ levels of interactional justice when
communicating bad news—a context where fairness has
been shown to be particularly important (Bennett et al.
1995). This finding presents a promising avenue for promoting fairness in organizations. To date, the majority of
research on justice as a dependent variable has focused on
subordinate characteristics (e.g., subordinate charisma,
Scott et al. 2007; assertiveness; Korsgaard et al. 1998; and
need for belongingness, Cornelis et al. 2013) that can
enhance managers’ enactment of fairness (see Patient and
Skarlicki 2010, for a notable exception of a manager-centric approach to fairness). Although these studies provide

Author's personal copy
Effects of Empathy and Self-Awareness on Fair Behavior

important insights into why managers may enact fairness,
these effects are dependent on the composition of an
organization’s workforce—a consideration that is relatively
hard to manage through organizational interventions. Selfawareness, on the other hand, is a manager-centric antecedent that can more readily be adopted into interventions
to promote fair behavior because it depends upon the
context in which managers operate. In order to deepen our
understanding of how to promote fairness in the workplace,
justice scholars should continue to examine these contextual factors and how these factors can be integrated into
interventions aimed at promoting fairness.
The significant interactive effects of trait empathy and
self-awareness also highlight the importance of justice
motivation in managers’ enactment of fairness. Specifically,
our results support the theoretical rationale that trait
empathy can motivate fairness by increasing the salience of
justice in the context of negative outcomes (Blader and
Tyler 2001; Patient and Skarlicki 2010) whereas selfawareness motivates behavior by increasing the salience of
normative standards (e.g., fairness) and discrepancies
between one’s actual behavior and these standards (i.e., the
discrepancy between how fair one wants to be and one’s
actual fair behavior; Duval and Wicklund 1972; Gibbons
1990). These findings support a larger stream of research
which suggests that increasing managers’ motivation to be
fair is a key component in promoting managers’ fair
behavior (Cornelis et al. 2013; Korsgaard et al. 1998; Scott
et al. 2007). As we continue to deepen our understanding of
why and when managers enact fairness in the workplace, it
may also be important for justice researchers to examine
contexts in which managers’ motivation to be fair may not
suffice (i.e., the boundary conditions for justice motivation).
For example, research on depletion has demonstrated that
the benefits of motivation can be tempered by factors such
as fatigue and sleep deprivation (e.g., Christian and Ellis
2011; Xu et al. 2012) and the depletion of self-regulatory
resources (e.g., ego depletion; Vohs et al. 2012). By
studying these potential boundary conditions, we may
develop a more comprehensive picture about how to promote fairness across a wide range of contexts and situations.
Traditionally, justice researchers have measured fairness
primarily from the employee’s perspective (Colquitt 2001;
Colquitt and Shaw 2005)—that is, asking employees about
the level of fairness they experience. This approach has
also pervaded research on justice as a dependent variable
(e.g., Korsgaard et al. 1998; Scott et al. 2007). Often times,
this research assumes that justice can only be measured
from the perspective of employees.2 However, consistent
with Patient and Skarlicki (2010), our findings suggest
that fairness behaviors can also be assessed from the
2

We thank an anonymous reviewer for this point.

perspective of an observer or by an observer imagining
themselves in the position of an employee. In other words,
a qualitative coding approach is another potential avenue
by which justice researchers can measure fair behavior.
This is important because this approach can provide justice
researchers with more flexibility in measuring fairness. For
example, while measuring managers’ fairness from the
employee’s perspective may be the best approach for field
studies, a qualitative coding approach may allow
researchers to measure fair behavior in the lab without the
need for overly complicated study designs. Future research
should consider utilizing and developing this coding
approach further, particularly as research on justice as a
dependent variable continues to garner attention.
Practical Implications
Our findings contribute to research examining the promotion of fairness through training programs and interventions
(e.g., Barclay et al. 2009; Greenberg 2006; Skarlicki and
Latham 1996, 1997). Specifically, managing fairness in the
workplace is a critical concern for organizations, especially
when communicating negative news to employees (Bennett
et al. 1995). To date, research has focused primarily on
training managers how to be fair (e.g., outlining examples
of fair behavior). However, managers also require the
motivation to be fair in order to translate this knowledge
into effective fair behavior (Ambrose and Schminke
2009a). Our findings demonstrate that trait empathy and
self-awareness are two avenues by which managers may be
more motivated to engage in interactional justice when
communicating negative news. This suggests that organizations may wish to place a greater emphasis on trait
empathy in their recruitment and selection of managers,
particularly in contexts where negative news is a frequent
occurrence, since these individuals are naturally predisposed to engage in greater levels of fairness.
Practically, however, it may not be feasible to only hire
managers with high levels of trait empathy. Our results
suggest that another way to increase managers’ justice
motivation is by situating managers in self-focusing contexts. These contexts can be created by something as
simple as placing a mirror on managers’ desks (Sentyrz and
Bushman 1998). It is important to note that these visual
cues are not necessarily required to activate states of selfawareness. Although we manipulated states of self-awareness using webcams, self-awareness can be activated by
any stimuli that cause a manager to focus attention on him
or herself as an object (Duval and Wicklund 1972). For
example, organizations may ask managers to reflect on
specific workplace events (e.g., performance appraisals,
meetings with employees) and rate the extent to which they
adhered to standards of fairness. Organizations can also

123

Author's personal copy
D. B. Whiteside, L. J. Barclay

embed justice standards in organizational policies (e.g.,
‘‘Code of Ethics’’). In this case, organizations can advise
managers to routinely compare their behavior with the
standards of fairness outlined in these statements. Taken
together, our results suggest that effective training programs should also incorporate interventions that maintain
the salience of fairness standards in the workplace and
provide managers with the impetus to compare their actual
fair behavior against ideal standards of fairness.
Our findings also provide new insights into the potential
implications of technology in a justice context. Specifically, virtual communication (e.g., email, text messaging)
is becoming increasingly common in organizations and this
context may present new barriers to fairness. Virtual
communication, for example, can increase the psychological distance between communicators, thereby creating
feelings of detachment and making communicators feel
less emotionally connected to others (Walther and Parks
2002). Moreover, the standards of ‘‘normative’’ communication are often less clearly defined in the context of
virtual communication (Cialdini et al. 1991). Managers
need to overcome these obstacles in order to treat their
employees fairly in a virtual environment. Our results
suggest that these virtual barriers to fairness may be tempered by adopting other forms of online communication
that activate states of self-awareness. For example, videoconference programs such as Skype that reflect the image
of the communicator on the screen for the duration of the
conversation may activate and help maintain states of selfawareness. By using such interventions, managers may be
more capable of overcoming virtual barriers of fairness
when communicating with employees.
Strengths, Limitations, and Future Directions
Our research has both strengths and potential limitations. We
used an experimental design to test our hypothesis, which can
strengthen internal validity by creating a controlled context for
examining relationships (cf. Aronson and Carlsmith 1968).
We also incorporated psychological realism into our study by
telling participants that their feedback would actually be
received by the test-taker and that the test-taker was interested
in the score for personal reasons. Future research, however,
would benefit from exploring these relationships in the field
and with other samples and methodologies.
In terms of our self-awareness manipulation, the same
medium for the feedback task was used (i.e., participants in
both conditions provided feedback by speaking into a
laptop). However, we only had video data for the high selfawareness condition. Thus, we were not able to compare
differences in other factors that may be relevant in the
context of fairness such as facial expressions and nonverbal
behaviors. Future research should examine whether self-

123

awareness can also influence individuals’ nonverbal
behaviors when communicating negative outcomes.
Moreover, while we were careful to create a context in
which the needs of the test-taker were prominent in our
study design, we cannot be certain that our self-awareness
manipulation increased the salience of justice motives. For
example, it is possible that self-awareness may have
influenced interactional justice by motivating participants
to communicate clearly and effectively to attain standards
of effective communication rather than standards of fairness. Future research should further examine the mechanisms underlying these effects.
Our feedback task may also not be representative of the
full range of feedback tasks managers encounter. First, participants were not responsible for the negative news being
communicated (i.e., they were not the cause of the testtaker’s poor performance). This may be an important consideration—for example, Folger and Skarlicki (2001) posit
that managers have an especially strong tendency to distance
themselves from victims of adversity when they are
responsible for the negative outcome—a term they refer to as
the Churchill effect (see also Folger 1993). Future research
should examine the potential moderating effects of responsibility for the negative news being communicated and
whether responsibility can act as a boundary condition on the
effects of self-awareness on fairness. Second, we focused on
audio and video feedback. However, managers may also
communicate negative news in other ways such as face-toface or in writing (e.g., email and memos). These mediums
may have unique effects on managers’ fairness—for example, face-to-face communication of negative news allows
individuals to interact and also allows employees to ask
clarifying questions. This may help managers determine how
to tailor communications to meet that employee’s specific
needs and encourage other processes, such as perspective
taking. On the other hand, these dyadic effects are less likely
to occur in the case of written communication. Future
research should further examine these differences. Finally,
participants were not able to avoid communication in our
feedback task. Self-awareness research has demonstrated
that avoiding self-focusing situations is another way that
people can reduce discrepancies caused by self-awareness,
particularly when it is unlikely that the discrepancy can be
reduced (Silvia and Duval 2001). Moving forward,
researchers should examine whether the ability to avoid
communicating bad news is a boundary condition for the
effects of self-awareness on fairness.

Conclusion
How can we promote fairness among managers who are less
inclined to adhere to standards of justice? This is a critical

Author's personal copy
Effects of Empathy and Self-Awareness on Fair Behavior

yet rarely studied question. Importantly, there will always be
managers who, as a result of their personality characteristics,
are predisposed to engage in lower levels of fairness than
others. However, this study suggests that organizations can
help these managers enhance their enactment of fairness
with a relatively simple contextual intervention. Moreover,
our results indicate that by exploring the interactive effects
between personality and context, justice researchers can
garner a deeper understanding of not only why managers fail
to treat employees fairly, but also how fairness can be promoted across a wide range of contexts and personality styles,
ultimately helping organizations experience the many benefits of a fair workplace.

References
Aiken, L. S., & West, S. G. (1991). Multiple regression: Testing and
interpreting interactions. Newbury Park, CA: Sage.
Ambrose, M. L., & Schminke, M. (2009a). Assessing roadblocks to
justice: A model of fair behavior in organizations. In J.
J. Martocchio, H. Liao, & A. Joshi (Eds.), Research in personnel
and human resources management (Vol. 28, pp. 219–263).
Greenwich, CT: JAI Press.
Ambrose, M. L., & Schminke, M. (2009b). The role of overall justice
judgments in organizational justice research: A test of mediation.
Journal of Applied Psychology, 94, 491–500.
Aronson, E., & Carlsmith, J. M. (1968). Experimentation in social
psychology. In G. Lindzey & E. Aronson (Eds.), Handbook of
social psychology (pp. 1–78). Reading, MA: Addison-Wesley.
Barclay, L. J., & Kiefer, T. (in press). Approach or avoid? Exploring
overall justice and the differential effects of positive and
negative emotions. Journal of Management. doi:10.1177/
0149206312441833.
Barclay, L. J., Skarlicki, D. P., & Latham, G. (2009). Greenberg doth
protest too much: Application always has been, and victims and
morality always will be critical for advancing organizational
justice research. Industrial and Organizational Psychology:
Perspectives on Science and Practice, 2, 201–204.
Barsky, A., & Kaplan, S. A. (2007). If you feel bad it’s unfair: A
quantitative synthesis of affect and organizational justice
perceptions. Journal of Applied Psychology, 92, 286–295.
Batson, C. D., Thompson, E. R., Seuferling, G., Whitney, H., &
Strongman, J. A. (1999). Moral hypocrisy: Appearing moral to
oneself without being so. Journal of Personality and Social
Psychology, 77, 525–537.
Bennett, N., Martin, C. L., Bies, R. J., & Brockner, J. (1995). Coping
with a layoff: A longitudinal study of victims. Journal of
Management, 21, 1025–1034.
Bies, R., & Moag, J. (1986). Interactional justice: Communication
criteria of fairness. In R. J. Lewicki, B. H. Sheppard, & M.
H. Bazerman (Eds.), Research on negotiations in organizations
(Vol. 2, pp. 43–55). Greenwich, CT: JAI Press.
Blader, S. L., & Tyler, T. R. (2001). Justice and empathy: What
motivates people to help others? In M. Ross & D. T. Miller
(Eds.), The justice motive in everyday life (pp. 226–250). New
York: Cambridge University Press.
Christian, M. S., & Ellis, A. P. (2011). Examining the effects of sleep
deprivation on workplace deviance: A self-regulatory perspective. Academy of Management Journal, 54, 913–934.

Cialdini, R. B., Kallgren, C. A., & Reno, R. R. (1991). A focus theory
of normative conduct: A theoretical refinement and reevaluation
of the role of norms in human behavior. In M. P. Zanna (Ed.),
Advances in experimental social psychology (Vol. 24,
pp. 201–234). Orlando, FL: Academic Press.
Cloninger, C. R., Przybeck, T. R., Svakic, D. M., & Wetzel, R. D.
(1994). The temperament and character inventory (TCI) A guide
to its development and use. St. Louis, MO: Center for
Psychobiology of Personality.
Cohen, J., Cohen, P., West, S. G., & Aiken, L. S. (2003). Applied
multiple regression/correlation analysis for the behavioral
sciences (3rd ed.). Mahwah, NJ: Erlbaum.
Cohen-Charash, Y., & Spector, P. (2001). The role of justice in
organizations: A meta-analysis. Organizational Behavior and
Human Decision Processes, 86 , 278–321.
Colquitt, J. A. (2001). On the dimensionality of organizational justice:
A construct validation of a measure. Journal of Applied
Psychology, 86 , 386–400.
Colquitt, J. A., Conlon, D. E., Wesson, M. J., Porter, C. O. L. H., &
Ng, K. Y. (2001). Justice at the millennium: A meta-analytic
review of 25 years of organizational justice research. Journal of
Applied Psychology, 86 , 425–445.
Colquitt, J. A., Scott, B. A., Rodell, J. B., Long, D. M., Zapata, C. P.,
Conlon, D. E., et al. (2013). Justice at the millennium, a decade
later: A meta-analytic test of social exchange and affect-based
perspectives. Journal of Applied Psychology, 98, 199–236.
Colquitt, J. A., & Shaw, J. C. (2005). How should organizational
justice be measured? In J. Greenberg & J. A. Colquitt (Eds.),
Handbook of organizational justice (pp. 113–152). Mahwah, NJ:
Lawrence Erlbaum.
Cornelis, I., Van Hiel, A., De Cremer, D., & Mayer, D. M. (2013).
When leaders choose to be fair: Follower belongingness needs
and leader empathy influences leaders’ adherence to procedural
fairness rules. Journal of Experimental Social Psychology, 49,
605–613.
Davis, M. H. (1980). A multidimensional approach to individual
differences in empathy. JSAS Catalog of Selected Documents in
Psychology, 10 , 85.
Davis, M. H. (1994). Empathy: A social psychological approach.
Madison, WI: Brown & Benchmark.
Diekmann, K. A., Samuels, S. M., Ross, L., & Bazerman, M. H.
(1997). Self-interest and fairness in problems of resource
allocation: Allocators versus recipients. Journal of Personality
and Social Psychology, 72, 1061–1074.
Duval, T. S., & Wicklund, R. A. (1972). A theory of objective selfawareness. New York: Academic.
Folger, R. (1993). The ‘‘Churchill paradox’’ in managing hard times.
Presentation at the annual meeting of the Academy of Management, Atlanta, GA.
Folger, R. (1998). Fairness as a moral virtue. In M. Schminke (Ed.),
Managerial ethics: Moral management of people and processes
(pp. 13–34). Mahwah, NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum.
Folger, R. (2001). Fairness as deonance. In S. W. Gilliland, D.
D. Steiner, & D. P. Skarlicki (Eds.), Research in social issues in
management: Theoretical and cultural perspectives on organizational justice (Vol. 1, pp. 3–33). Greenwich, CT: Information
Age Publishing.
Folger, R., & Cropanzano, R. (1998). Organizational justice and
human resource management. Thousand Oaks, CA: Sage.
Folger, R., & Cropanzano, R. (2001). Fairness theory: Justice as
accountability. In J. Greenberg & R. Cropanzano (Eds.),
Advances in organizational justice (pp. 1–55). Stanford, CA:
Stanford University Press.
Folger, R., & Skarlicki, D. P. (1998). When tough times make tough
bosses: Managerial distancing as a function of layoff blame.
Academy of Management Journal, 41, 79–87.

123

Author's personal copy
D. B. Whiteside, L. J. Barclay
Folger, R., & Skarlicki, D. P. (2001). Fairness as a dependent
variable: Why tough times can lead to bad management. In R.
Cropanzano (Ed.), Justice in the workplace: Volume II—From
theory to practice (pp. 97–118). Mahwah, NJ: Lawrence
Erlbaum.
Gibbons, F. X. (1990). Self-attention and behavior: A review and
theoretical update. Advances in Experimental Social Psychology,
23, 249–303.
Govern, J. M., & Marsch, L. A. (2001). Development and validation
of the situational self-awareness scale. Consciousness and
Cognition, 10 , 366–378.
Greenberg, J. (1980). Attentional focus and locus of performance
causality as determinants of equity behavior. Journal of
Personality and Social Psychology, 38, 579–585.
Greenberg, J. (1990). Looking fair versus being fair: Managing
impressions of organizational justice. In B. M. Staw & L.
L. Cummings (Eds.), Research in organizational behavior (Vol.
12, pp. 111–157). Greenwich, CT: JAI.
Greenberg, J. (2001). The seven loose ca(n)nons of organizational
justice. In J. Greenberg & R. Cropanzano (Eds.), Advances in
organizational justice (pp. 245–272). Stanford, CA: Stanford
University Press.
Greenberg, J. (2006). Losing sleep over organizational justice:
Attenuating insomniac reactions to underpayment inequity with
supervisory training in interactional justice. Journal of Applied
Psychology, 91, 58–69.
Hoffman, M. L. (2000). Empathy and moral development: Implications for caring and justice. New York: Cambridge University
Press.
Korsgaard, M. A., Roberson, L., & Rymph, R. D. (1998). What
motivates fairness? The role of subordinate assertive behavior on
managers’ interactional fairness. Journal of Applied Psychology,
83, 731–744.
Lerner, M. J. (1971). Observer’s evaluation of a victim: Justice, guilt,
and veridical perception. Journal of Personality and Social
Psychology, 20 , 17–35.
Margolis, J. D., & Molinsky, A. (2008). Navigating the bind of
necessary evils: Psychological engagement and the production of
interpersonally sensitive behavior. Academy of Management
Journal, 51, 847–872.
McNeely, B. L., & Meglino, B. M. (1994). The role of dispositional
and situational antecedents in prosocial organizational behavior:
An examination of the intended beneficiaries of prosocial
behavior. Journal of Applied Psychology, 79, 836–844.
Messick, D. M., Bloom, S., Boldizar, J. P., & Samuelson, C. D.
(1985). Why we are fairer than others. Journal of Experimental
Social Psychology, 21, 480–500.
Molinsky, A., & Margolis, J. (2005). Necessary evils and interpersonal sensitivity in organizations. Academy of Management
Review, 30 , 245–268.
Patient, D. L., & Skarlicki, D. P. (2010). Increasing interpersonal and
informational justice when communicating negative news: The

123

role of the manager’s empathic concern and moral development.
Journal of Management, 36 , 555–578.
Rupp, D. E., Shao, R., Jones, K. S., & Liao, H. (2014). The utility of a
multifoci approach to the study of organizational justice: A
meta-analytic investigation into the consideration of normative
rules, moral accountability, bandwidth-fidelity, and social
exchange. Organizational Behavior and Human Decision Processes, 123, 159–185.
Scott, B. A., Colquitt, J. A., & Paddock, E. L. (2009). An actorfocused model of justice rule adherence and violation: The role
of managerial motives and discretion. Journal of Applied
Psychology, 94, 756–769.
Scott, B. A., Colquitt, J. A., & Zapata-Phelan, C. P. (2007). Justice as
a dependent variable: Subordinate charisma as a predictor of
interpersonal and informational justice perceptions. Journal of
Applied Psychology, 92, 1597–1609.
Sentyrz, S. M., & Bushman, B. J. (1998). Mirror, mirror on the wall,
who’s the thinnest one of all? Effects of self-awareness on
consumption of full-fat, reduced-fat, and no-fat products.
Journal of Applied Psychology, 83, 944–949.
Silvia, P. J., & Duval, T. S. (2001). Objective self-awareness theory:
Recent progress and enduring problems. Personality and Social
Psychology Review, 5, 230–241.
Skarlicki, D. P., & Latham, G. P. (1996). Increasing citizenship
behavior within a labor union: A test of organizational justice
theory. Journal of Applied Psychology, 81, 161–169.
Skarlicki, D. P., & Latham, G. P. (1997). Leadership training in
organizational justice to increase citizenship behavior within a
labor union: A replication. Personnel Psychology, 50 , 617–634.
Spencer, S., & Rupp, D. E. (2009). Angry, guilty, and conflicted:
Injustice towards coworkers heightens emotional labor through
cognitive and emotional mechanisms. Journal of Applied
Psychology, 94, 429–444.
Vallacher, R. R., & Solodky, M. (1979). Objective self-awareness,
standards of evaluation, and moral behavior. Journal of Experimental Social Psychology, 15, 254–262.
Vohs, K. D., Baumeister, R. F., & Schmeichel, B. J. (2012).
Motivation, personal beliefs, and limited resources all contribute
to self-control. Journal of Experimental Social Psychology, 48,
943–947.
Walther, J. B., & Parks, M. R. (2002). Cues filtered out, cues filtered
in: Computer mediated communication and relationships. In M.
L. Knapp & J. A. Daly (Eds.), Handbook of interpersonal
communication (3rd ed., pp. 529–563). Thousand Oaks, CA:
Sage.
Wicklund, R. A. (1975). Objective self-awareness. In L. Berkowitz
(Ed.), Advances in experimental social psychology (Vol. 9,
pp. 233–275). New York: Academic Press.
Xu, H., Begue, L., & Bushman, B. J. (2012). Too fatigued to care:
Ego depletion, guilty, and prosocial behavior. Journal of
Experimental Social Psychology, 48, 1183–1186.

