8_AMMORI_COMPLETE

12/3/2008 2:47 PM

THE FAIRNESS DOCTRINE: A FLAWED
MEANS TO ATTAIN A NOBLE GOAL
MARVIN AMMORI*
TABLE OF CONTENTS
Introduction ............................................................................................... 881
I. The Fairness Doctrine Will Not Be Imposed and Should Not Be
Partisan ........................................................................................... 883
II. The Fairness Doctrine Will Not Achieve Its Praiseworthy Goals .. 885
A. The Fairness Doctrine Is Easy to Avoid .................................. 885
B. The Fairness Doctrine Would Once Again Rarely Be
Enforced .................................................................................. 887
C. The Fairness Doctrine Is at Most a Second-Best Solution
for a Concentrated Speech Market .......................................... 889
III. There Are More Appropriate Means to Ensure Access to
Diverse Viewpoints and Information About Local Issues .............. 892
A. Media Ownership Limits ......................................................... 892
B. Low Power FM ........................................................................ 893
C. Open-Internet Initiatives .......................................................... 893
Conclusion ................................................................................................. 893
INTRODUCTION
This Paper is a response to the current, but largely manufactured,
controversy over whether or not to revive the long-dead Fairness Doctrine.
In 2007 and 2008, right-wing radio hosts and bloggers used this
controversy as a partisan wedge to detract from more pressing and timely
media policy issues. The Fairness Doctrine was a regulation that the
Federal Communications Commission (FCC) repealed in 1987. While in
effect, the Fairness Doctrine required broadcasters (1) to devote a
reasonable percentage of time to the coverage of public issues and (2) to
cover these issues in a way that provides an opportunity for the
presentation of contrasting points of view.1 The Doctrine was “concerned
* Assistant Professor, University of Nebraska–Lincoln College of Law, Faculty

881

8_AMMORI_COMPLETE

882

12/3/2008 2:47 PM

ADMINISTRATIVE LAW REVIEW

[60:4

with controversial issues of both local and national importance.”2
In recent months, right-wing talk radio hosts have been talking a lot
about the Fairness Doctrine, claiming both that Democrats seek to reinstate
the Doctrine and that the goal of such reinstatement is mainly to kill rightwing radio.3 Indeed, one sitting FCC Commissioner decided to one-up
even the right-wing shock jocks and claimed that Democrats would
implement a Fairness Doctrine for Internet and new media as well as old.4
While the talk radio hosts and disingenuous bureaucrats tell an entertaining
story, neither of their claims is accurate. First, with the exception of a few
comments, Democrats have not attempted to reinstate the Fairness Doctrine
and have not introduced any bill to do so.5 The 2008 Democratic
presidential nominee and President-elect Barack Obama unequivocally
opposes any attempt to reinstate the Fairness Doctrine.6 Second, the
Fairness Doctrine would not silence conservative radio even if it were
reinstated. Accordingly, there is no conspiracy to reinstate the Fairness
Doctrine or to kill talk radio. Indeed, while the Fairness Doctrine sought to
advance a noble goal—ensuring public access to public information and
diverse viewpoints—the Doctrine is no longer an effective means for doing
so. Rather than following the lead of talk show hosts debating a doctrine
repealed twenty years ago, legislators should focus on current media
policies that can enhance the public’s access to public information and
Advisor, Space & Telecomm Law Program. Also serves as counsel for the consumer group
Free Press.
1. See, e.g., The Handling of Pub. Issues Under the Fairness Doctrine and the Pub.
Interest Standards of the Commc’ns Act, 48 F.C.C.2d 1, 7 (1974) (Fairness Report)
(explaining broadcasters’ duties under the Fairness Doctrine).
2. The Handling of Pub. Issues Under the Fairness Doctrine and the Pub. Interest
Standards of the Commc’ns Act, 89 F.C.C.2d 916, 925 (1982) (Memorandum Opinion and
Order).
3. See, e.g., James Gattuso, Beyond Talk Radio: Fairness Doctrine Taking a Beating
in Blogosphere Too, TECHNOLOGY LIBERATION FRONT, June 28, 2007,
http://techliberation.com/2007/06/28/beyond-talk-radio-fairness-doctrine-taking-a-beatingin-blogosphere-too/ (claiming that talk-radio-show hosts are against revival of the Fairness
Doctrine); Michelle Malkin, Fairness Doctrine Watch: A “Progressive” Attack on Talk
Radio, MICHELLEMALKIN.COM, June 21, 2007 (and other posts on the page),
http://michellemalkin.com/2007/06/21/fairness-doctrine-watch-a-progressive-attack-on-talkradio/ (arguing that the left wants to address the “lack of ideological diversity” in radio).
4. Posting of jstearns to Save the Internet Blog, http://www.savetheinternet.com/blog
(Aug. 13, 2008, 13:34 EST); Matthew Lasar, Fairness Doctrine Panic Hits FCC, Spreads
Through
Blogosphere,
ARSTECHNICA,
August
17,
2008,
http://arstechnica.com/news.ars/post/20080817-fairness-doctrine-panic-hits-fcc-spreads-throughblogosphere.html.
5. Just about every one of these comments can be found in SENATE REPUBLICAN
POLICY COMMITTEE, THE FAIRNESS DOCTRINE: UNFAIR, OUTDATED, AND INCOHERENT 3
(2007).
6. John Eggerton, Obama Does Not Support Return of Fairness Doctrine,
BROADCASTING
&
CABLE,
June
25,
2008,
http://www.broadcastingcable.com/article/CA6573406.html.

8_AMMORI_COMPLETE

2008]

12/3/2008 2:47 PM

THE FAIRNESS DOCTRINE

883

diverse viewpoints without the drawbacks of the Fairness Doctrine.
This Paper has three primary parts. First, it rebuts the conservative
messages about the Fairness Doctrine. Neither Congress nor the FCC will
likely impose the Fairness Doctrine, and support for the Doctrine did not
historically, and should not now, track partisan lines. Second, though the
Doctrine’s goals are praiseworthy, the Doctrine would be an ineffective
means to attain those goals. As the Doctrine’s history until 1987 shows,
the Doctrine is easy to avoid, is difficult to enforce, and is at most a
second-best solution. Third, as a result of its ineffectiveness, Congress and
the FCC should focus on more effective means of fostering local and
national public information and diversity of viewpoints, primarily by
fostering responsiveness to local tastes and diverse and antagonistic sources
of information. More effective means would include implementing strict
ownership limits, authorizing community radio, and encouraging open,
high-speed Internet access.
I. THE FAIRNESS DOCTRINE WILL NOT BE IMPOSED AND
SHOULD NOT BE PARTISAN
The Fairness Doctrine will not be readopted. The conservative buzz on
this issue derives from no more than a few isolated quotes over the past
several months by 5 of the 284 Democrats in Congress. Several legislators
have merely suggested that they would consider or look into imposing the
Fairness Doctrine,7 but not a single legislator has introduced a bill to
reinstitute the Fairness Doctrine. Indeed, the only legislative activity in this
area has involved attempts by Republicans to foreclose the FCC from
reinstituting the Fairness Doctrine8—even though Democrats had not acted
to reinstitute it, and the Republican FCC chairman said he would not act to
reinstitute it.9 The current Fairness Doctrine controversy consists largely of
talk radio’s sound and fury about nothing.
7. These quotations can be found, for example, on the website of Congressman Mike
Pence.
See
Mike
Pence,
Fairness
Doctrine
Democrat’s
Quotes,
http://mikepence.house.gov/ConstituentServices/democratquotes.htm (last visited Aug. 22,
2008). According to this page, several legislators believed that Nancy Pelosi and Steny
Hoyer also supported reviving the Doctrine. Id.
8. See, e.g., John Eggerton, House Passes Amendment Disallowing Funding for
Fairness
Doctrine,
BROADCASTING
&
CABLE,
June
28,
2007,
http://www.broadcastingcable.com/article/CA6456430.html (explaining that the House
recently passed an amendment to an appropriations bill with a 310–15 vote, which prevents
any money from being spent on reviving the Fairness Doctrine).
9. See John Eggerton, Martin Reinforces Opposition to Fairness Doctrine,
BROADCASTING
&
CABLE,
July
26,
2007,
http://www.broadcastingcable.com/article/CA6463549.html?rssid=193
(quoting
FCC
Chairman Kevin Martin’s statement that he sees “no compelling reason to reinstate the
Fairness Doctrine in today’s broadcast environment, and believe[s] that such a step would
inhibit the robust discussion of issues of public concern over the nation’s airwaves”).

8_AMMORI_COMPLETE

884

12/3/2008 2:47 PM

ADMINISTRATIVE LAW REVIEW

[60:4

Moreover, when the Fairness Doctrine was being enforced, it was not a
partisan issue. Conservatives supported and opposed it, as did liberals. As
one conservative opponent of the Doctrine has noted, “Many conservatives
embraced the Fairness Doctrine during its life and even lamented its
demise, viewing the doctrine as a handy club to be wielded against ‘liberal’
programming, especially at the network level.”10 At the same time, a wide
range of liberal scholars have strongly opposed the Doctrine.11 In 1987, the
FCC voted to repeal the Doctrine by a 4–0 vote, even though only three
Commissioners were Republicans. Following that vote, the Senate passed
a bill reinstating the Fairness Doctrine, which was cosponsored by a
Democratic Senator and a Republican Senator; the House passed an
identical bill, but the legislation was ultimately vetoed.12 Moreover, the
Fairness Doctrine has received considerable support from both
conservative and liberal nonprofit groups attempting to disseminate their
messages.13
Not only has the Fairness Doctrine not historically been partisan, it
should not now be a partisan issue because it formally applies to
conservative and liberal programming alike. It would apply to Ed Schultz,
Democracy Now, Pacifica, and Air America no less than it would to Rush

10. E. Brandt Gustavson, The Fairness Doctrine: Once and Future Threat to Speech,
Religion, in SPEAKING FREELY: THE PUBLIC INTEREST IN UNFETTERED SPEECH; ESSAYS FROM
A CONSERVATIVE PERSPECTIVE 87, 88 (1995).
11. Professors Harry Kalven, Herbert Wechsler, and Archibald Cox filed amici briefs
for the broadcasters to argue that the Court should strike down the Fairness Doctrine. See
Brief for Respondent Radio Television News Directors Ass’n, Red Lion Broad. Co. v. FCC,
395 U.S. 367 (Mar. 22, 1969); Brief for Respondent Columbia Broadcasting System, Red
Lion Broad. Co. v. FCC, 395 U.S. 367 (1969). Professor Laurence Tribe also believes the
doctrine is unconstitutional. See Laurence H. Tribe, The Constitution in Cyberspace: Law
and Liberty Beyond the Electronic Frontier, http://www.epic.org/free_speech/tribe.html
(last visited Nov. 22, 2008).
Other liberal scholars have suggested the Fairness Doctrine, while not
unconstitutional, is still bad policy. See, e.g., Yochai Benkler, Free Markets vs. Free
Speech: A Resilient Red Lion and Its Critics, 8 INT’L J.L. & INFO. TECH. 214, 214–15 (2000)
(reviewing ROBERT CORN-REVERE, RATIONALES AND RATIONALIZATIONS, REGULATING THE
ELECTRONIC MEDIA (1997)) (arguing that several scholars have taken aim at the Supreme
Court’s logic in Red Lion); see also Jack M. Balkin, The Fairness Doctrine, Part I,
BALKINIZATION.COM, July 28, 2007, http://balkin.blogspot.com/2007/07/fairness-doctrinepart-i.html (arguing that the Fairness Doctrine is bad public policy, but is not facially
unconstitutional).
12. Veto of the Fairness in Broadcasting Act of 1987, 23 WEEKLY COMP. PRES. DOC.
715 (June 29, 1987). The Senate sponsors of the bill were John Danforth and Daniel Inouye.
For a discussion of the issues underlying the opposition to the Fairness Doctrine, see
Inquiry into Section 73.1910 of the Commission’s Rules and Regulations Concerning the
General Fairness Doctrine Obligations of Broadcast Licenses, 102 F.C.C.2d 143, 226 (1986)
[hereinafter General Fairness Doctrine Obligations].
13. See, e.g., FORD ROWAN, BROADCAST FAIRNESS: DOCTRINE, PRACTICE, PROSPECTS
73–74 (1984) (listing the groups that are the Media Access Project’s clients as an example
of those that have supported the Fairness Doctrine).

8_AMMORI_COMPLETE

2008]

12/3/2008 2:47 PM

THE FAIRNESS DOCTRINE

885

Limbaugh, Sean Hannity, and Michael Savage. While AM talk radio is
overwhelmingly conservative, not all FM radio and broadcast television are
similarly conservative. Furthermore, programming complaints would come
from liberal and conservative groups because groups on both sides of every
issue—from gun control to abortion to the Iraq war—can file complaints.
In addition to nonprofit groups, corporations can file their own complaints.
That is, corporations can dispute stories discussing global warming, wages,
downsizing, environmental harms, accounting fraud, or tax avoidance.14
Rather than being a partisan attempt to silence speech, the Fairness
Doctrine should be seen as a well-intentioned, if flawed, means to ensure
that the public receives diverse viewpoints in the presentation of public
information.
II. THE FAIRNESS DOCTRINE WILL NOT ACHIEVE
ITS PRAISEWORTHY GOALS
If the Fairness Doctrine attempts to ensure that the listening public
receive news about controversial public affairs and diverse views about that
news, it is seeking to achieve praiseworthy goals. When Americans are
exposed to diverse views about public matters, they can better debate
policy issues, hold elected officials to account, and reach consensus on
matters of vital public importance.15
But the Fairness Doctrine likely will not increase such diverse coverage
for at least three reasons:16 it is easy to avoid, it is difficult to enforce, and it
is at most second-best when compared to the option of diverse speakers.
A. The Fairness Doctrine Is Easy to Avoid
First, the Fairness Doctrine is easy to avoid. Because it requires ample
play for diversity of views, the Fairness Doctrine would require difficult
judgment calls. Much of the discretion for making those judgments must
14. See, e.g., id. at 75–76 (discussing an aluminum company’s negotiating with ABC
in response to a 20/20 segment on the dangers of aluminum wiring).
15. For in-depth academic discussions, see CASS R. SUNSTEIN, DEMOCRACY AND THE
PROBLEM OF FREE SPEECH xi (1993) (arguing that the First Amendment is a significant
barrier to official censorship); Yochai Benkler, Siren Songs and Amish Children: Autonomy,
Information, and Law, 76 N.Y.U. L. REV. 23, 29 (2001) (arguing that a market-focused
information policy with highly concentrated markets comes at the significant cost of
personal autonomy); Robert H. Bork, Neutral Principles and Some First Amendment
Problems, 47 IND. L.J. 1, 26 (1971) (arguing that one of the four functions of speech is to
spread political truths and asserting that this aspect is “different from any other form of
human activity”).
16. In repealing the Doctrine, the FCC concluded the Doctrine resulted in less, not
more, diverse news. See General Fairness Doctrine Obligations, supra note 12, at 159
(asserting that the Fairness Doctrine may prevent a licensee from “presenting controversial
issues of public importance”).

8_AMMORI_COMPLETE

886

12/3/2008 2:47 PM

ADMINISTRATIVE LAW REVIEW

[60:4

be left to the broadcasters. These judgments include whether the issue is
even controversial; whether a specific subissue is controversial; whether a
diversity of views has indeed been presented; whether enough time for each
view has been allotted; whether enough different views have been
presented; and whether a local issue is important to the community. If the
government makes these judgments, then government officials would play
far too great a role in determining the news, in ways that would threaten
private provision of the news. So broadcasters must have some
considerable discretion in making these judgments to reduce the threat of
government censorship.
If the broadcasters receive considerable discretion, as they did when the
Fairness Doctrine was being enforced,17 then the Doctrine is easy to avoid.
The Fairness Doctrine permits the broadcaster to cover different points of
view and does not generally authorize other people to present those
views.18 So the broadcaster controls the presentation. If a news reporter
covered a controversy, that reporter could merely follow the usual
journalistic ethic of seeking neutrality and objectivity in presenting both
sides of a story.19 Moreover, if the broadcaster wanted to present one view,
it could undercut rival views with relative ease. The broadcast could
present the rival’s views itself or choose spokespersons for those views; in
choosing spokespersons, it could select the least articulate, least coherent,
and less (or more) extreme spokespersons, as it chose.20
If those imposing the Fairness Doctrine seek not to promote diverse
views but to silence talk radio, the Fairness Doctrine will likely fail in that
regard as well. Partisan talk show hosts would still be able to convey their
views clearly, to the exclusion of other views. As Professor Jack Balkin of
Yale Law School has observed, “Rush Limbaugh might have to invite a
series of liberal patsies to give their views, which he could bully, make fun
of, or talk past.”21 As he noted, a radio version of Hannity and Colmes
17. See Posting of Eugene Volokh to The Volokh Conspiracy, http://volokh.com (July
27, 2007, 19:34 EST) (quoting authors and noting that, when the Fairness Doctrine was
being enforced, “surprisingly little balance [was] necessary to meet the obligation to cover
all significant sides of an issue”).
18. The broadcaster had to permit certain persons to advocate their views under two
subdoctrines: the personal-attack and political-editorial rules. Both were far narrower than
the Fairness Doctrine and rarely applied. See Balkin supra note 11; STEVEN J. SIMMONS,
THE FAIRNESS DOCTRINE AND THE MEDIA 10 (1978) (stating the two subdoctrines are
“applicable in a limited number of situations”).
19. See Balkin, supra note 11 (noting an example where the “traditional journalistic
neutrality/objectivity” satisfied the Fairness Doctrine).
20. See Volokh, supra note 17 (questioning whether a broadcaster’s discretion will
allow broadcasters to select “rival speakers who are just inarticulate or foolish” to present a
rival viewpoint); Balkin, supra note 11 (stating that licensees determined the sides to a
relevant issue and then decided who would represent those sides).
21. Balkin, supra note 11.

8_AMMORI_COMPLETE

2008]

12/3/2008 2:47 PM

THE FAIRNESS DOCTRINE

887

would probably meet the Fairness Doctrine for that reason—though
Colmes is more moderate and less articulate than the conservative
Hannity.22 Indeed, Limbaugh need not invite any liberals and could offer
his own account of “liberal views, which would no doubt be highly
amusing to his audience.”23 So broadcasters could easily avoid the Fairness
Doctrine because of the necessary discretion they receive in presenting
diverse views.
B. The Fairness Doctrine Would Once Again Rarely Be Enforced
Second, the later history of the Fairness Doctrine demonstrates that the
Doctrine was difficult to enforce and therefore infrequently enforced.
While the FCC received many complaints, far fewer than 1% of them
succeeded.
The FCC did not rely on an internal FCC content police, but rather
enforced the Doctrine through its action on viewer complaints. Before the
early 1960s, there were “few fairness complaints,” but then the number of
filed complaints soared.24 In 1963, the FCC decided to address Fairness
Doctrine complaints as they were filed, rather than to continue the previous
practice of considering the complaints at license renewal.25 While the
number of complaints quickly rose from 233 complaints in 1960 to 1,632 in
1969,26 very few complaints succeeded.
The FCC’s process resulted in very few adverse rulings against
broadcasters. Complaints by telephone were not even addressed unless
supported by extensive documentation. Written complaints fared little
better.27 They were considered by a broadcast analyst first. In reviewing
these complaints, the analyst typically found half to lack all merit and filed
those complaints in a “No Response Necessary” file.28 Of the rest, another
half would receive an 8330-FD document, which explained that the
complaint was too vague, therefore inadequate, and sought the necessary
specific information.29 “Most” recipients of these letters did not follow

22. Id.
23. Id.
24. SIMMONS, supra note 18, at 11, 14 n.20.
25. Id. at 14 n.20.
26. Id. at 214.
27. See ROWAN, supra note 13, at 52–53 (describing the process through which written
complaints were processed while noting, however, that only 1,000–2,000 of the 10,000
complaints the FCC received in an election year were actually complaint letters).
28. See id. (noting that complaints placed in the “No Response Necessary” files
included those that were sent to the FCC for information, those that were general and did
not address a particular network or station, and “crank” letters).
29. See id. at 53 (outlining the additional information that a complainant must provide
to satisfy the FCC’s specificity requirements).

8_AMMORI_COMPLETE

888

12/3/2008 2:47 PM

ADMINISTRATIVE LAW REVIEW

[60:4

up.30 The analyst could refer other complaints to lawyers in the
Fairness/Political Broadcasting Branch; these lawyers would often also
request more information from the complainant or simply send a Form
8330-FD. Either way, again, most complainants did not follow up at that
point.31 In most cases, the station had never been asked to respond or had
never even received a copy of the complaint, though the FCC would file
the complaint in the station’s public files.32 These responses accounted for
more than 99% of written complaints.33 When faced with the less than 1%
of complaints that complied with all the requirements and were sufficiently
specific, the FCC would ask the broadcaster to respond.34 After briefing,
the staff would rule on the complaint. While the ruling was appealable to
the FCC Commissioners, the Commissioners generally upheld staff
decisions.35
This process resulted in a handful of adverse rulings a year. One scholar
noted that in 1976, less than one tenth of one percent of complaints resulted
in a station inquiry.36 Out of over 41,000 complaints, only 24 resulted in
station inquiries, and only 16 of those resulted in adverse rulings.37 In
1975, there were a little over 3,000 complaints, with only 10 adverse
rulings, and in 1974, there were 1,874 complaints, and 6 adverse rulings.38
The odds became even worse in subsequent years, with the success rate
falling from 1 in 1,000 to 1 in 2,000.39 In 1980, 10,000 complaints resulted
in 6 adverse rulings, and in 1981, almost 6,000 complaints resulted in only
3 adverse rulings—all based on issue advertising, not programming
imbalance.40 Generally, individuals’ chance of success was “virtually nil,”
as most would give up before the ruling stage, while nonprofit groups,

30. See id. (stating the reason “most people” do not respond to the form is because the
FCC requires precision in the description of the complaint in order to “relieve broadcasters
of the burden of disproving vague complaints”).
31. See id. (explaining that most complainants never follow up even where their
complaint raises a question that an analyst or legal technician cannot answer).
32. See id. at 54 (describing the process that the FCC uses in filing most complaints
and staff responses).
33. See id. (noting that in 99.5% of all Fairness Doctrine complaints the station need
not do anything in response).
34. See id. (noting that only those complaints that “compl[y] with all the requirements”
can build a case strong enough to require a reply from the station).
35. See id. at 53–54 (noting that the right of appeal from a staff decision is of
questionable utility given that “staff decisions [were] upheld in all [eighteen] Fairness cases
appealed to the full commission from 1979 to 1981”).
36. SIMMONS, supra note 18, at 210.
37. See id. (examining fairness complaints during the mid-1970s).
38. See id. (analyzing the number of the complaints in the mid-1970s and describing
the small number of station inquiries as “striking”).
39. ROWAN, supra note 13, at 62.
40. Id.

8_AMMORI_COMPLETE

2008]

12/3/2008 2:47 PM

THE FAIRNESS DOCTRINE

889

mainly “single-issue” groups, had a marginally higher chance.41 They
would often receive some success through negotiating informally with
broadcasters, but they were negotiating in the shadow of what was, to the
nonprofits, unsympathetic law.42 The main reason for the high rate of
failure was the FCC’s complaint-discouraging policies. The FCC sought to
protect broadcasters from harassment by eliminating vague or inappropriate
complaints, and most complaints failed because the FCC conferred
considerable discretion on broadcasters in presenting diverse views.
Indeed, the FCC’s policy on devoting time to covering controversial
issues made that prong of the Fairness Doctrine almost unenforceable.
Even though the FCC once said that “the single most important
requirement of operation in the public interest”43 was to devote a
reasonable amount of time to coverage of controversial issues of public
importance, the FCC explicitly refused to “interfere with the broadcaster’s
journalistic discretion in this area except in the rare case . . . .”44 As a
result, the FCC would “presume compliance with [the prong] unless a
complainant [could] substantially indicate otherwise.”45
Finally, resolution of complaints was slow.
Even those few
organizations that did pursue and win their fairness complaints had to press
their claims for months or years. In 1973, the average time between airing
a program and the final resolution was approximately eight months, and in
1984, the average time was more than a year.46
C. The Fairness Doctrine Is at Most a Second-Best Solution for a
Concentrated Speech Market
Third, even the early history of the Fairness Doctrine demonstrates it
was always a second-best option. The best option was to use the spectrum
not for a few “balanced” speakers but for many diverse and antagonistic
speakers.
41. See id. at 62, 73 (stating that the reason that small, locally organized groups are
more successful is that these groups “can afford, or at least have access to, expert legal
counsel” and are “in a position to jump when something airs that appears to deal with ‘their’
issue”).
42. See generally id. at 71–87 (chronicling various organizations’ attempts to settle
Fairness Doctrine disputes with broadcasters informally).
43. Complaints of Comm. for the Fair Broad. of Controversial Issues, 25 F.C.C.2d 283,
292 (1970) (Memorandum Opinion and Order) (citation omitted).
44. The Handling of Pub. Issues Under the Fairness Doctrine and the Pub. Interest
Standards of the Commc’ns Act, 89 F.C.C.2d 916, 920 (1982) (Memorandum Opinion and
Order).
45. Id.
46. See ROWAN, supra note 13, at 54 (noting that the author’s review of FCC rulings
just prior to the book’s 1984 publication indicated that the then-current resolution time was
more than one year).

8_AMMORI_COMPLETE

890

12/3/2008 2:47 PM

ADMINISTRATIVE LAW REVIEW

[60:4

The Fairness Doctrine developed from 1929 to 1949—the year the FCC
recapitulated its evolving Doctrine. The Fairness Doctrine was imposed “at
the outset,” when the FCC and its predecessor agency, the Federal Radio
Commission (FRC), reallocated broadcasting licenses in the late 1920s and
early 1930s. Because the spectrum was congested with users, the FCC
reallocated licensees, largely disfavoring the existing nonprofit and
educational users and favoring large commercial networks. In reallocating
the licenses in its 1929 Third Annual Report, the FCC stated, “In so far as a
program consists of discussion of public questions, public interest requires
ample play for the free and fair competition of opposing views . . . .”47 For
the next ten years, the FCC enunciated this fairness concept in license
renewals. In 1940, it described the duty of “well-rounded rather than onesided discussions of public questions.”48 In 1949, the Commission
summarized its policy in its Report on Editorializing.49
“Balance” was required because so few speakers were being licensed. In
the late 1920s, when the FCC reallocated licensees, its stated preference for
“balance” was based on—one supposed—favoring large commercial
broadcasters over ideological nonprofit organizations.50 In 1928, with
perhaps so many broadcasters on air that listeners often received static, the
FRC announced a reallocation plan to alter the frequencies of 94% of
broadcasters and, over the next several years, to severely reduce the
number of broadcasters.51 The plan and its implementation favored large
commercial broadcasters over smaller noncommercial broadcasters because
the plan assigned fewer and more powerful licenses.52 Within a year of
implementing the plan, there were 100 fewer broadcasters.53 In defending
the reallocation, the FRC claimed that stations best served the public
interest if they served the entire public, notably with “a well-rounded
program” of entertainment and cultural programming, such as the programs

47. Great Lakes Broad. Co., 3 FRC ANN. REP. 32, 33 (1929).
48. 6 FCC ANN. REP. 55 (1940).
49. See generally Editorializing by Broadcast Licensees, 13 F.C.C. 1246, 1247 (1949)
(Report of the Commission) (reexamining the Commission’s position on broadcasters’
obligations and ultimately determining that the broadcast licensees are the ones who must
“be responsible for the selection of the particular news items to be reported”).
50. ROBERT W. MCCHESNEY, TELECOMMUNICATIONS, MASS MEDIA, AND DEMOCRACY
26–27 (1993).
51. See id. at 25 (recounting the Federal Radio Commission’s (FRC) decision to
implement the reallocation plan General Order 40 and the FRC’s public assertions that the
plan was the only reasonable way to provide good broadcasting to the listening public).
52. See id. at 26 (explaining that the FRC initially maintained that it was in the public
interest that more highly capitalized stations get the limited slots that the reallocation
created because those stations “had the equipment to take advantage of [those] slots”).
53. See id. (stating that the number of stations after the reallocation declined despite the
FRC’s never having rejected a license renewal application).

8_AMMORI_COMPLETE

2008]

12/3/2008 2:47 PM

THE FAIRNESS DOCTRINE

891

endorsed by the Fairness Doctrine.54 By contrast, the FRC claimed that
“propaganda” stations, meaning merely those stations disseminating
particular viewpoints, such as today’s talk radio stations, did not best serve
the public interest. As the FRC chose to allocate fewer, more powerful
licenses, it claimed that there was “not room in the broadcast band for
every school of thought, religious, political, social, and economic, each to
have its separate broadcasting station . . . .”55 In the 1929 Third Annual
Report, in which the FRC first announced the fairness concept, also stated
that a commercial station providing well-rounded programs has “a claim of
preference over a propaganda station” for a license, even if the ideological
station accompanied its “messages with entertainment and other program
features of interest to the public,” because of the ideological station’s
“temptation not to be fair to opposing schools of thought.”56 In
implementing its reallocation, the FRC required broadcasters to share the
same frequencies and would divide the hours based on which licensee was
most worthy. When the FRC renewed licenses every three months and
determined the balance of hours per broadcaster, it consistently favored the
“balanced” commercial stations over the ideological nonprofit stations. For
example, on WGN, the nonprofit Voice of Labor lost a hearing for more
hours against the Chicago Tribune.57 As George Will recently noted, the
FRC in 1928 decided that the programming on WEVD, a New York station
licensed to the Socialist Party, was not in the public interest and warned the
station to show “due regard for the opinions of others.”58
The Fairness Doctrine, which commercial broadcasters embraced to
claim that they served the public interest, was never the ideal policy
solution. The better option was to have unfettered exchange of views by
different speakers, including nonprofit and for-profit ideological speakers.
Faced with the technology of the 1920s, the FRC concluded that not every
school of thought could have its own mouthpiece, so the few lucky
commercial licensees would have to present competing views. As
discussed above, imposing this obligation on licensees was largely
ineffective.
54. See id. at 27 (outlining and explaining the criteria that the FRC found important in
determining which stations best served the public interest).
55. Id.
56. Id. at 28; see also id. (quoting the FRC’s Third Annual Report for the proposition
that general public service stations take precedence over propaganda stations “for access to
the same channel”).
57. See id. (asserting that the nonprofit stations often fell victim to one of the two
networks); see also SIMMONS, supra note 18, at 34.
58. George F. Will, Fraudulent “Fairness,” NEWSWEEK.COM, May 7, 2007,
http://www.newsweek.com/id/35081/output/print; Thomas W. Hazlett & David W. Sosa,
“Chilling” the Internet? Lessons from FCC Regulation of Radio Broadcasting, 4 MICH.
TELECOMM. & TECH. L. REV. 35, 44 (1998) (citation omitted).

8_AMMORI_COMPLETE

892

12/3/2008 2:47 PM

ADMINISTRATIVE LAW REVIEW

[60:4

With today’s technology, however, government can pursue better policy
options that are more likely to enhance the public’s exposure to public
information and diverse viewpoints.
III. THERE ARE MORE APPROPRIATE MEANS TO ENSURE ACCESS TO
DIVERSE VIEWPOINTS AND INFORMATION ABOUT LOCAL ISSUES
Rather than join talk show hosts and bloggers in discussing a policy
abandoned in the 1980s, Congress should implement policies that would
actually result in diverse viewpoints. Congress should not attempt to
regulate (ineffectively) a few broadcasters for diverse viewpoints, but
should ensure that more and more speakers are free to reach their intended
audiences with their public messages. The American communications
system generally seeks political truth not through a few regulated speakers
but through diverse speakers. The Supreme Court has repeatedly endorsed
what “has long been a basic tenet of national communications policy,”
which is “that the widest possible dissemination of information from
diverse and antagonistic sources is essential to the welfare of the public.”59
The Court has stated, similarly, that “assuring that the public has access to
a multiplicity of information sources is a governmental purpose of the
highest order, for it promotes values central to the First Amendment.”60
Another basic tenet, which has been part of broadcast policy from the
outset of regulation, has been to foster local information sources and local
information.61
Congress should favor policies that increase the diversity of sources.
These include media ownership limits, low power FM, and open-Internet
initiatives.
A. Media Ownership Limits
Congress should act quickly to pass a bill eliminating the FCC’s
quadrennial reviews and retaining, or tightening, the broadcast ownership
limits as they existed in 2002. It should also require the FCC to perform a
study to determine how the digital transition may necessitate even stricter
ownership limits. Congress or the FCC should also initiate an inquiry into
59. Turner Broad. Sys., Inc. v. FCC, 512 U.S. 622, 663 (1994) (quoting Assoc. Press v.
United States, 326 U.S. 1, 20 (1945)). For a discussion of how this principle animates
communications policy, see Yochai Benkler, Free as the Air to Common Use: First
Amendment Constraints on Enclosure of the Public Domain, 74 N.Y.U. L. REV. 354, 446
(1999).
60. Turner, 512 U.S. at 663.
61. See, e.g., Broad. Localism, 19 F.C.C.R. 12,425, 12,425 (2004) (Notice of Inquiry)
(asserting that broadcast licensees “must air programming that is responsive to the interests
and needs of their communities of license”).

8_AMMORI_COMPLETE

2008]

12/3/2008 2:47 PM

THE FAIRNESS DOCTRINE

893

how the ownership relationships between station owners and program
syndicators affects the radio market.
B. Low Power FM
Congress should act quickly to pass legislation permitting the FCC to
license additional low power radio stations to local nonprofit organizations
in more towns and cities.
C. Open-Internet Initiatives
Most importantly, Congress should take steps to ensure that all members
of the public have access to open, high-speed Internet. The Internet can
provide an open platform for many diverse and antagonistic speakers.
Congress can ensure a competitive market in Internet delivery and open
platforms by adopting rules that ensure network neutrality (building on the
foundation of a recent, celebrated decision against Comcast’s blocking of
peer-to-peer technologies),62 supporting community broadband, providing
more access to unlicensed spectrum (such as in the television white
spaces), and imposing wholesale and open-device obligations on licensed
wireless providers (for example, in the 700 MHz auction).63
CONCLUSION
Debate about the Fairness Doctrine is a red herring, as the Doctrine will
not and should not be reinstated. Assertions by conservatives that
Democrats are attempting to reinstate the Fairness Doctrine are inaccurate.
The Doctrine is easy to avoid and difficult to enforce, making reinstatement
of the Doctrine ineffective at best. Rather than debate a doctrine that will
not pass, Congress and the FCC should encourage diverse ownership of
traditional media and open, high-speed Internet access as the most
appropriate means of making diverse viewpoints available to the public.
The history of the Fairness Doctrine’s inability to achieve its intentions as
well as the lack of any recent effort to bring it back are evidence that the
Fairness Doctrine was noble in its intentions but lacking in its execution.

62. See generally Formal Complaint of Free Press, No. EB-08-IH-1518 (Aug. 20,
2008), http://hraunfoss.fcc.gov/edocs_public/attachmatch/FCC-08-183A1.pdf; Posting of
Lawrence Lessig to Lessig Blog, http://lessig.org/blog/ (Aug. 20, 2008, 17:54 EST).
63. For a discussion of these issues, see, for example, Communications, Broadband
and Competitiveness: How Does the U.S. Measure Up?: Hearing Before the S. Comm. on
Commerce, Science and Transportation, 110th Cong. (2007) (statement of Ben Scott, Policy
Director, Free Press), available at http://www.freepress.net/files/42407bssentestimony.pdf.

