A “Filter Bubble” for Relationships? Interpersonal
Closeness and Surprise About Missed Posts on Facebook

Emilee Rader and Rebecca Gray
Department of Media and Information
Michigan State University
{emilee,grayreb} @msu.edu

ABSTRACT

Our study investigates the discovery of posts on Facebook
that were missed in one’s News Feed, a possible individual-
level effect of content filtering algorithms on Facebook, as a
way of exploring potential outcomes of feedback loops be-
tween user and system behavior. We examine the relation-
ships between the strength of Facebook Friendships, use of
explicit News Feed curation mechanisms, and the outcomes
of noticing missed posts from Friends, and associated feel-
ings of surprise. We find that the closeness of a relation-
ship does not impact the likelihood of noticing missed posts
from Friends, but that closeness does impact the degree to
which individuals are surprised about missed posts. Finally,
we discuss reasons to believe that missed posts associated
with higher levels of surprise for close friends might be an
individual-level symptom of a systematic pattern of unex-
pected behavior by Facebook’s News Feed algorithm, and
what this means for feedback loops and algorithmic curation
in socio-technical systems.

INTRODUCTION

We have all experienced a feeling of information overload.
This phenomenon did not originate with the Internet and
social media; people complained of it when print books
first made their appearance, and when the telegraph was in-
vented [19]. People turn to online media for the same things
they used to find offline in pamphlets, telegrams, and newspa-
pers: for information about what is going on in the world and
in the lives of people they care about; for entertainment; for
help with information-based tasks like finding a restaurant or
figuring out when they should go to a doctor; and to discover,
learn and do many other things.

People are becoming increasingly dependent on online socio-
technical systems that collect, organize and display large
quantities of information. These systems are implementing
algorithmic curation: filtering the content displayed to users
via automated algorithms that determine what should be dis-

Working paper, last updated July 21, 2014.

played and what should be hidden. In his recent book, Eli
Pariser refers to this phenomenon as the “filter bubble” [30].
His construct represents the effects of online information per-
sonalization over time—primarily the bad things that might
happen when algorithms make it easier for users to access
content that is in some way similar to the content they have
already read or experienced [24].

Researchers have imagined this becoming a problem in a
number of ways, from a lack of diversity of opinion in politi-
cal discussions online [1, 18] (which we know results in more
extreme viewpoints [19]), to the emergence of a new kind of
digital divide between those who are well versed in “algorith-
mic literacy”! and those who are not, to a self-reinforcing spi-
tal of groupthink responsible for poor decision-making [8].

These negative consequences are all presumably the result of
feedback loops: situations where the output of some process
becomes an input to that same process. This happens in social
media because information consumers are also producers—
both explicitly via choices to post, comment or “Like”, and
also implicitly via their behavioral traces recorded in system
logs. What users learn about the system when they act as con-
sumers can affect the choices they make as producers. For
example, if I notice that particular Facebook posts created by
a couple of Friends have received a lot of positive attention
in the form of comments and “Likes”, I might (consciously
or unconsciously) start creating posts with similar character-
istics [40].

Algorithmic curation acts as a constraint on users’ choices
about what to pay attention to. Outsourcing curation to help
users mitigate information overload and stay on top of things
is not a new phenomenon, either. The first dictionaries were
invented not to make sure everybody spelled words correctly
and had a good vocabulary—it was actually to keep a list
of all the words that people were using in all the different
senses (and spellings) they appeared, so that people could un-
derstand and communicate with each other better [19]. The
Yellow Pages, bestseller lists, even ancient dictionaries can be
thought of as curation of a sort, in that someone took charge
of organizing and maintaining a collection of a particular type
of information, for the consumption of others.

A series of Facebook blog posts starting in 2013 describes
ongoing changes to the News Feed to make it so that users
are only shown the posts from their Friends that they should

‘http://www.thelateageofprint.org/201 1/10/17/algorithmic-
literacies
find most interesting, rather than thousands of new posts that
could be displayed each time a user visits Facebook [4]. In
effect, like the curators of the first dictionaries, Facebook
has assumed the responsibility of determining which content
users should see. These constraints are personalized for each
user based on characteristics of the producers, consumers,
and the content itself. As the users and content change over
time, these constraints change along with them.

We wondered whether algorithmic curation on Facebook
might have effects that can be detected at the individual level.
If so, this could be evidence of a feedback loop that could bias
users’ interactions on Facebook in directions they would not
necessarily pursue if they had a more obvious choice. Face-
book presents a unique opportunity to study this, because
people know who many of their Friends are and have a list
of them they can use to navigate their Friends’ content. This
directory—the Friend List—means it is theoretically possible
to ask users to go looking for possible individual-level effects
of algorithmic curation, and to answer questions about these
effects.

In this project, we asked respondents of our online sur-
vey to visit the Timelines of a subset of their Facebook
Friends—both those they selected as close friends and some
that were randomly selected from their Friend Lists—and tell
us whether they found any posts there that they did not re-
member seeing in their News Feeds. We wondered whether
the prevalence of missed posts would vary according to re-
spondents’ perceived closeness of their relationship with each
Friend, and whether that would have any bearing on whether
or not they were surprised at having missed posts from partic-
ular people. Finally, we asked respondents to speculate about
possible explanations for why they did not see post(s) from
particular Friends in their News Feeds.

We found that individuals are very likely to have missed posts
from Friends in their News Feeds, regardless of how close
they are with their Friends. Very active users who report accu-
rate memories of the recency of Friends’ latest posts still en-
counter posts they have missed when visiting Friends’ Time-
lines. Feelings of surprise about missed posts, however, are
generally reserved for missed posts from close Friends, in-
dicating a kind of expectation violation. We relate these ex-
periences of surprise to the reasons for which users believe
they missed particular posts from Friends, and discuss the
implication that surprising missed posts may be a symptom
of a feedback loop resulting from algorithmic curation in the
News Feed.

RELATED WORK

In a socio-technical system like Facebook, the information
contributed through the normal course of users’ actions is
both input and output of the system. This means that the
News Feed algorithm is a part of a feedback loop that shapes
the diversity of information users have access to—and who
they communicate with—on Facebook.

Systems that use algorithmic curation to filter content to be
consumed by users are conceptually and technically similar

to recommender systems, with one important difference. In
a recommender system viewing the recommendation is just
the first step toward consumption. The user must then take
some action (e.g., watch the movie, listen to the artist, buy
the product, etc.). In social media curation, there is no rec-
ommendation. The system displays some items and does not
display others. To extrapolate this to Netflix, it would be as if
the user sat down to watch a movie and instead of choosing
one, had to go down the queue watching the recommended
movies in order without seeing what else might be available.
Algorithmic curation removes the ability to explicitly choose,
and replaces it with inferences based on a user model that is
developed from behavioral traces accumulated as people use
the system over time.

It is difficult to objectively measure effectiveness of and satis-
faction with the system’s “recommendations”, because users
aren’t explicitly making choices, and it is challenging to col-
lect data about what content has actually been consumed
(read). Another complication is that even in the filtered
stream, there will be some content items that users just aren’t
interested in, and there is still just too much information for
users to read all of it. At a behavioral level, we can often
identify influences and effects of algorithmic curation only
indirectly. One possible approach is to try to identify points
of unexpected or surprising behavior within the system; these
often occur in conjunction with aspects of the system’s struc-
ture that we do not yet understand [28].

In the related work below, we review literature about user at-
tention in social media, preferences in recommender systems,
and relationship maintenance on Facebook to provide context
for our focus on using unseen posts as a potential indicator of
unexpected system behavior.

Attention and Posts Not Seen

One of the main reasons for using algorithmic curation in a
social media system is to help users cope with information
overload. We know that there is too much information flying
by in systems like Facebook and Twitter for users to possi-
bly attend to it all, even if they wanted to. For example, we
know that Twitter users seem to produce no more than about
40 tweets per day [20], and that on average one’s friends are
more active than they are. The larger one’s network, the more
information is coming in, and this leads to a situation where
the people one is following produce more content than users
are willing to consume [25].

While people with larger networks tend to be more active
users, this does not necessarily mean that they treat all in-
coming content equally. Users tend to start at the top of the
stream and work their way down, but as the volume of the
feed goes up, the probability of retweeting a particular post
[26] decreases. In addition, even when a Twitter user is “over-
loaded” (meaning they cannot keep up with the stream), they
prioritize tweets from a subset of sources for retweeting [20].

Studies like the above use behavioral trace data to infer atten-
tion based on network connections, post and stream metadata,
and also use re-sharing content as a proxy for attention. How-
ever, this does not take into consideration the posts that users
read and then do not interact with any further. Counts and
Fisher [11] conducted an eye tracking study of users reading
tweets from their own feed, and then measured memorabil-
ity of the tweets. Participants remembered 69% of the posts
they had seen during the study, and tweets they had attended
to for longer were more memorable for them. Also, partici-
pants paid less attention to tweets from frequent tweeters, and
remembered these tweets less.

Taken together, these findings indicate that users are rate-
limited in terms of their consumption of social media content,
and that they do not divide their limited attention evenly. In-
stead, they prefer content from some users over others, and
become more discriminating and potentially biased toward
particular information producers as the volume of the incom-
ing stream increases.

Feedback Loops in Algorithmic Curation

Recommender systems depend on some way of measuring
user preferences. More accurate data about preferences sup-
ports making better recommendations. However, in situations
of algorithmic curation, behavioral traces and network or tie
strength data are often used as a proxy for preferences. This
approach has merit: Sharma et al. [36] demonstrated that in
terms of preferences for movies and music on Facebook and
hashtag use on Twitter, users are more similar to their own
networks than to random users.

Recommender system designers must assume a relationship
between past preferences and future preferences, because the
past information is all the system has to go on when trying to
figure out what people might want to see in the future. The
assumption here is that preferences in the past are identical to
future preferences; that’s the easiest shortcut, and various in-
vestigations have shown that preferences to tend to be stable
over time (i.e., if I liked “Star Wars” the first time I rated it,
I’m likely to give it a similar rating if I rated it again) [13].
However, this assumption does not necessarily hold in social
media systems where the timeframe for consumption of in-
formation, or one’s awareness of how many other people have
seen or posted it, changes the meaning or importance of the
information itself.

We know that ratings in recommender systems are vulnerable
to bias and manipulation, having consequences for the abil-
ity of the system to make effective recommendations [32].
Several research projects have found that seeing other users’
ratings for an item influences subsequent ratings [2, 10]. In
addition, preferences and behavior in a socio-technical sys-
tem are not independent, meaning that users influence both
each other and the composition of the corpus of information
in the system. If I give “Star Wars” a high rating, the assump-
tion is that’s because I actually liked it, not because I want
you to know that I liked it, or for some other social reason.
It becomes very hard to interpret and make satisfactory rec-
ommendations based on information that does not represent
true preferences. However, this is often the case in social me-
dia where communication takes place. For example, a recent
paper by Cheng et al. [9] reports that negative feedback in
response to comments and votes on news stories leads to a
subsequent drop in post quality by the users who received the

feedback, and also encourages more frequent posting activity
and negative evaluations of others.

Preferences can also be a result of the interaction between
the recommendation and some other information the system
is not privy to, which means it is difficult to make accurate
predictions about what users want to see. In an investigation
of social recommendations, Sharma et al. [35] found effec-
tiveness of recommendations was based both on the nature of
the user’s relationship with the endorser of the content (e.g.,
“X and Y recommend this”), but also other prior information
or past experience.

As these points illustrate, the circumstances under which al-
gorithmic curation operates make it very difficult to make
both effective and satisfactory recommendations: where users
are both producers and consumers of information leading to
a feedback loop that is vulnerable to artificial manipulation,
and where the value and benefit gained from information is
short-lived and influenced by the social context.

Relationships on Facebook

Keeping in touch with close social ties is one of the main rea-
sons for using Facebook, and many have reported that using
it has “revived ‘dormant’ relationships” [31]. Research on
predictors of SNS use has found that individuals derive great
enjoyment from learning about close friends’ and acquain-
tances’ lives, with heavier users displaying more curiosity
about how individuals from their pasts are faring, and how
they may have changed [42]. A variety of affordances are
associated with lower barriers to maintaining relationships in
these contexts, such as the ability to perform actions such as
“Liking” others’ posted content, commenting, sending mes-
sages, and posting direct messages to others’ profile pages [7,
16, 41]. These actions can be used as a proxy for measuring
“social attention” on Facebook, or how an individual chooses
to focus their attention across their network.

Our online and offline social networks are composed of re-
lationships of varying strengths. Research on the variation
of active? network size revealed that across varying sizes of
social networks, the distribution of closeness across ties is
relatively similar [33]; most individuals have a normal distri-
bution of emotionally close relationships in their offline ac-
tive social networks, with very few ties of very high or very
low emotional closeness. Past research of online social net-
works has suggested that the low barriers to adding Friends
and maintaining relationships on many SNSs is associated
with higher numbers of weak ties in individuals’ online social
networks [38, 43]; in past studies of Facebook Friend net-
works, users have reported that they consider approximately
25-37% of their Facebook Friends to be “actual” friends [15,
16]. Backstrom et al. [5] found what they called “churn”
across two time periods among Facebook users’ most com-
mon communication partners, meaning the distribution of at-
tention among these ties was not the same from one time pe-
riod to the next.

“Active” relationships met three conditions: (1) they had contact
information; (2) they had been in contact within past year; (3) they
desire the relationship to continue [33]
Relationships of different strengths in one’s online social net-
work are related to varying kinds of benefits beyond the sat-
isfaction of maintaining social relationships. Weak ties on
Facebook, for example, have been empirically linked to per-
ceived access to diverse information and resources within
one’s network (or bridging social capital) [6, 14] and receiv-
ing useful responses to broadcasted questions to one’s net-
work [21]. Strong ties, on the other hand, have also been asso-
ciated with benefits such as aid with finding new employment
after losing a job [6], providing satisfying responses [21] and
overall knowledge contributions [29] in response to broad-
casted questions on Facebook. Both kinds of ties add value to
the use of SNSs for users with varying needs and goals.

Use of SNSs can also impact the strength of the relation-
ships maintained in these contexts. Recent longitudinal re-
search by Burke and Kraut [7] revealed that communicating
with others on Facebook is related to increases in reported re-
lational closeness, even when controlling for other kinds of
non-Facebook communication, such as face-to-face interac-
tion, phone calls, and email. All kinds of one-on-one com-
munication led to increases in tie strength, with larger im-
pacts of written communication (e.g., composed messages,
direct posts, and comments) over other kinds of signals (e.g.,
“Likes”) [7]. Other recent research has also found that
recent and more frequent communication on Facebook, as
well as the use of more kinds of Facebook communication
modes, predicts “relational escalation,” or an increase in tie
strength [37].

METHOD

In a typical recommender system, users are not aware of the
bounds of the set of possible items that might be suggested to
them. In information retrieval terms, there’s no way for users
to assess the recall capabilities of the system because they
don’t know what’s out there to choose from. However, Face-
book users are typically Facebook Friends with individuals
they already know offline [39] and may have a general sense
of what and who should be represented in their News Feeds.
Situations of incomplete system recall are much more likely
to be noticed when the possibilities are all at least somewhat
familiar. The content of each user’s News Feed is determined
by an algorithm designed to show what the system believes
is the most relevant to each user, based on behavioral traces
such as, “the number of comments, who posted the story, and
what type of post it is (ex: photo, video, status update)” [17].

By exposing users to Friends’ content that was potentially
not displayed in their News Feeds, we can investigate ques-
tions such as, how likely are users to miss posts from indi-
vidual Facebook Friends? What role does closeness play—
are users more likely to have noticed a missed post from a
closer Friend? How surprising is it to users to find out they
have missed posts? What explanations do they associate with
missed posts from particular Friends? We conducted an on-
line survey to present respondents with a situation where they
might notice one of the effects of implicit curation: visiting a
Facebook Friend’s Timeline and noticing a post that they did
not remember seeing in their News Feeds.

To achieve this, we used the Qualtrics survey platform, and

wrote custom JavaScript to integrate our survey with the
Facebook API. After consenting to the study, respondents
were prompted to log in to Facebook (if they were not
logged in already). The JavaScript Facebook app running
on our server connected to the respondent’s Facebook pro-
file and collected basic information, which it transferred into
the Qualtrics survey: the names, profile photos and profile
links of the respondent’s Facebook Friends. The survey then
displayed a popup window with a list of all of the respon-
dent’s Facebook Friends, and asked the respondent to select a
handful of people they feel closest to*. After selecting close
Friends, the popup window appeared again, this time popu-
lated with 20 people randomly selected from the respondent’s
Friend list, not including the close Friends they already se-
lected.

In both cases, they were instructed not to select Friends under
the age of 18, anyone they would feel uncomfortable answer-
ing questions about, and any “Friends” that were not actually
people (e.g. pets, organizations, etc.). The app retained the
same number of randomly selected Friends as close friends
for inclusion in the survey, so both types would be evenly
represented. The names and profile photos of the selected
Friends, as well as links to the Friends’ Timelines, were in-
corporated into questions in the survey and then discarded
when each respondent completed the survey.

The survey included questions at two levels: some questions
were about respondents, like their Facebook activity and de-
mographics. The survey also included questions at the Friend
level, like the respondent’s self-report of the closeness of their
relationship with each Friend incorporated into the survey via
the Facebook app.

In the first section of the survey, respondents answered sep-
arate questions about their memory for each Friend’s recent
activity on Facebook, and how close they felt to each Friend.
Then, they were asked to visit each Friend’s Facebook Time-
line via a profile link collected by the Facebook app and em-
bedded in the survey, and answer questions about Friends’
actual posting behaviors. After visiting each Friend’s time-
line, respondents were asked questions that make up the two
main dependent variables in this study:

- When you were scrolling through X’s Timeline, did you notice
posts he or she created that you don’t remember seeing in your
News Feed? [ No, Yes ]

- “I feel surprised that I did not see X’s post(s) in my News Feed”
[ Strongly Disagree - Strongly Agree ]

The next section of the survey included questions about re-
spondents’ own Facebook activity, and their beliefs and in-
ferences about how the News Feed selects content to display.
The final section asked questions about respondent demo-
graphics. The text of survey questions and descriptive statis-
tics are available in the Appendix.

PARTICIPANTS

3The instructions were based on the survey in Burke and Kraut [7].
Respondents in the Qualtrics survey selected 4 close and 4 random
Friends; MTurk respondents selected 5 of each.
 

Qualtrics MTurk

Total N A475 464
Internet Literacy M=2.5  M=3.5
(0.92) (0.83)

Men 177 274
Women 298 190

s About once/wk 6 8
= A few times/wk 30 32
‘E About once/day 50 63
f& Several times/day 389 361
«> Never 13 10
& Less than once/wk 125 170
3 About once/wk 61 89
8 A few times/wk 109 98
& About once/day 16 54
Several times/day 91 43

3 21-100 friends 173 114
-£ 101-300 friends 150 208
a 301-500 friends 85 83
= 501+ friends 67 59

Qualtrics = MTurk

Friends in Survey 8 10
18-25 105 157
» 26-34 113 191
= 35-50 115 103
51-65 113 12
66-75 29 1
Some HS 22 9
& HS grad 130 63
= Vocational 35 31
= Some college 160 170
§ College grad 94 161
Post-grad 34 30
Caucasian/White 412 372
African American 27 41
£ Native American 11 7
= Asian 23 40
& Pacific Islander 3 3
Hispanic/Latino 27 24
Other 7 1

 

Table 1. A comparison of demographics between the two samples.

We collected a first round of data using a panel recruited
and maintained by Qualtrics, and a second round with Ama-
zon Mechanical Turk (MTurk) workers. Respondents in both
samples were not eligible to participate if they were younger
than 18, had 20 or fewer Facebook Friends, or visited Face-
book less than once per week. The Qualtrics sample included
an age quota: 30% of respondents had to be older than 50. For
the MTurk sample, there was no age quota, but only workers
from the USA who had a 90% or higher approval rating af-
ter completing at least 500 tasks were eligible. Five hundred
thirty respondents from the Qualtrics sample finished the sur-
vey, as did 505 MTurk respondents.

We excluded cases from our analysis for several reasons.
First, we excluded respondents who answered any of the “at-
tention check” questions incorrectly, and incomplete cases on
the variables we used for the analyses in this paper. We also
excluded respondents from both samples who said they had
“Good” or “Full” familiarity with a fake word that was part
of the Internet Literacy index variable*. Finally, we excluded
a small number of cases where MTurk respondents had sub-
mitted nonsensical responses to the open-ended question, as
well as several cases with different MTurk worker [Ds that
had virtually identical open-ended responses.

We encountered an issue with the way the Qualtrics survey
platform’s client-side JavaScript works—or rather does not
work—in Internet Explorer, which resulted in some otherwise
eligible respondents being unable to complete the survey cor-
rectly. The Qualtrics survey platform heavily uses client-side
JavaScript that works fine in most modern web browsers, but
an interaction between Qualtrics’ code and our Facebook app
caused the Friend chooser to not operate correctly for some

*The questions that comprise the Internet Literacy variable are based
on the Web Use Skills survey reported in Hargittai and Hsieh [22]).
It consists of the average of respondents’ assessments of their famil-
iarity with a list of Internet-related terms (/=3.00; SD=0.99, Cron-
bach’s a=0.87). The list of terms is available in the Appendix.

respondents who tried to complete the survey using IE. This
resulted in questions in the survey not populating correctly
with Friend names, profile photos and profile links. We were
able to detect when this happened, and exclude just those
cases.

The final size of the Qualtrics panel sample was 475 respon-
dents, and for Mechanical Turk, 464. The sample from the
Qualtrics panel was more women (298) than men (177), while
the MTurk sample was more men (274) than women (190).
Qualtrics respondents had a lower mean Internet Literacy
score (M=2.54, SD=0.92) than MTurk respondents (M=3.48,
SD=0.83). MTurk respondents were younger overall than
Qualtrics respondents (MTurk median = “26-34”, Qualtrics
median = “35-50”). The education distribution was very sim-
ilar across both samples.

We combined these two samples into one dataset, which al-
lowed us to analyze a sample of heavy Facebook users in
the US that is much more valid than the typical convenience
sample. We purposefully sampled for heavier users because
we felt that we were already asking questions about some-
thing respondents were not expected to have seen (i.e. missed
posts), and we wanted to have a best-case opportunity to en-
counter respondents who had that experience.

In addition, according to a report by the Pew Research Cen-
ter’s Internet & American Life Project, the majority of Amer-
ican Facebook users utilize the site at least once a day (63%)
with at least 40% checking the site several times per day [12].
Also, an analysis of Nielsen data from a nationally repre-
sentative US household audience panel collected in March
2011 that involved measured computer usage (not self-report)
found that Facebook users are more likely than non-users to
be female, young (13-17 years old), white, and to have at
least a high school diploma [44]. We feel that our sample
is a reasonable approximation of these characteristics, with
the caveat that users younger than 18 were ineligible for our
survey.

MEASURES
In this section we describe the measures we used in the sur-
vey, and our expectations for the analyses we conducted.

Likelihood of Noticing a Missed Post

The dependent variable notice.missing is a Friend-level vari-
able, meaning that respondents answered the same question
once for each Friend: “When you were scrolling through X’s
Timeline, did you notice posts he or she created that you don’t
remember seeing in your News Feed? [No, Yes].” Missed
posts present an interesting opportunity to explore respon-
dents’ beliefs about how the News Feed chooses what to dis-
play, and is also an inflection point that could indicate either a
totally expected or a totally unexpected outcome for respon-
dents. Ninety-three percent of respondents from the MTurk
sample (433 of 464) noticed at least one missed post, as did
74% (353 of 475) of respondents from the Qualtrics sample.

Likelihood of SURPRISE at Noticing a Missed Post

For each Friend respondents were asked questions about in
our survey, if the respondent indicated that they saw on the
Friend’s Timeline a post they had missed, we asked the re-
spondent to indicate how surprised they were about this. Sur-
prise is an indicator of an expectation violation. With this
question, we wanted to elicit a reaction from each respon-
dent that would indicate whether for this particular relation-
ship, the system behavior met their expectations. The ques-
tion was, “I am surprised that I did not see X’s post(s) in my
News Feed”.

Qualtrics respondents answered on a 1-7 Likert scale,
strongly disagree to strongly agree. The same question in
the MTurk survey used a 5-point scale; therefore, we cen-
tered both variables around their respective neutral values and
scaled them so that they range from -1 to 1, before combin-
ing the samples into one dataset. We then collapsed these
values into a categorical variable with three levels: Not Sur-
prised (values less than 0), Neutral (values equal to 0), and
Surprised (values greater than 0). Two hundred sixty-eight
MTurk respondents (58%) experienced surprise at a missed
post on at least one Friend’s Timeline, as did 216 Qualtrics
respondents (45%).

Relationship Closeness

Previous research has identified effects of Facebook commu-
nication on the strength of users’ relationships: the more peo-
ple communicate with each other on Facebook, the closer
they become, even controlling for other forms of interper-
sonal communication online and offline [7]. We measured
closeness using the “Inclusion of Other in the Self Scale” [3],
which is a 7 point scale that uses images of circles that do
not overlap on the low end (coded as 1) and move closer to
each other until they almost completely overlap on the high
end (coded as 7). The mean closeness for the “close” Friends
respondents had specified via the Facebook app at the begin-
ning of the survey was 4.38 (SD=1.97), and for the “randomly
selected” Friends was 2.19 (SD=1.60).

We explicitly sampled close Friends, instead of randomly se-
lecting all the Friends asked about in the survey, because
Facebook users have many more weak ties as Friends than
strong ties. We expected closeness would be related both
whether respondents noticed a missed post, and how sur-
prised they were about it, and wanted to have sufficient varia-
tion in the closeness variable to see these effects. We thought
that whether respondents noticed a missed post would have
an inverse relationship with closeness: respondents should be
more likely to notice missed post from more distant Friends,
because these are the posts that respondents would be least
likely to spend their limited attention on. Conversely, we hy-
pothesized that it would be more surprising for a respondent
to find a post she had missed on a close Friend’s Timeline
than a distant acquaintance’s.

Manual Curation Behaviors

We asked respondents to report whether they had ever done
(No, Yes) a list of behaviors that can potentially influence
whether or not particular posts appear in the News Feed. The
actions included the following, and were presented in random
order to each participant:

Use sorting options for your News Feed (e.g., Top Stories, Most
Recent, other Friend lists, etc.) [507 Yes]

- Add someone to your Close Friends list [414 Yes]

Click “Hide all” to remove all stories from a person, page or
group [460 Yes]

Click “I don’t want to see this” to hide a post [648 Yes]
“Like” a page [900 Yes]

- Turn OFF notifications for a page [500 Yes]

- Turn ON notifications for a Friend’s activity [319 Yes]
Unfollow a person [569 Yes]

UnFriend or block a person [792 Yes]

- “Unlike” a page [662 Yes]

The variable curation.behaviors is the count of the above ac-
tions for which each respondent answered Yes. It ranges
from 0 to 10, with a median of 6. Thirteen people from the
Qualtrics sample had never done any of these behaviors. We
expected that respondents who do a greater variety of man-
ual curation behaviors would be more likely to experience
missed posts. Respondents who are more active in curating
their own feeds would likely be only seeing a subset of posts,
determined by their own explicit curation actions. We also ex-
pected that respondents who engage in more different manual
curation behaviors—who take a more active role in deciding
what posts they do and do not want to see—would be less
surprised to find missed posts.

Memory Compared with Reality

We thought the accuracy of respondents’ recollections about
how recently their Facebook Friends had created posts might
also be important for whether or not they noticed or were
surprised by missed posts. If a respondent’s memory is in-
accurate, we might expect that her judgment about whether
posts from a Friend appeared in her News Feed would be less
reliable than if she had remembered her Friend’s posting be-
havior accurately. Also, we feel that this can be interpreted
as a proxy for the amount of attention the respondent pays to
a particular Friend’s posts, so we expected that respondents
who had a fairly accurate recollection of when their Friends
last posted would be more surprised to find missed posts.

In the survey, we asked respondents to first estimate how re-
cently they thought each Friend had last created a post, before
looking at that Friend’s Timeline. Respondents then went to
that Friend’s Timeline to see how recently he or she had ac-
tually created a post. We coded the difference between these
two responses as a categorical variable with three levels: the
most recent post was either “Older than the respondent re-
membered”, “About what the respondent remembered”, or
“Newer than the respondent remembered”. The majority of
respondents reported having accurate memory for when each
Friend’s most recent post took place (MTurk: 59%, Qualltrics:
63%).

Demographics and Facebook Activity

Three variables describe respondents’ level of activity on
Facebook in terms of how often they visit, post, and how
many Facebook Friends they have. Visit frequency was mea-
sured with the question, “How often do you usually VISIT
Facebook?” Respondents were also asked, “How often do
you usually POST to Facebook?” These categorical control
variables were all included as numeric predictors in the re-
gression models described below. Three additional variables
are demographic controls: internet literacy, age, and gender.
The Facebook activity and age variables were all centered at
the median for both analyses, and the internet literacy variable
was centered at the mean. This changes the interpretation of
the intercepts in the regressions from “all variables held at
zero” to “all variables held at their median/mean”. Finally,
each regression model includes a categorical term indicating
which sample each data point came from, MTurk or Qualtrics.
Table 1 presents the values for each of these variables, for
both samples.

RESULTS

We used regression analysis to investigate the relationship
between the measures described above and two dependent
variables: whether or not a respondent noticed a missed post
when visiting the Timeline of a Facebook Friend, and if the
missed post surprised them. The predictors in both models
are identical, and allow us to answer questions about how
important closeness with the Friend is for the occurrence of
missed posts and surprise, controlling for subject-level dif-
ferences like level of Facebook activity, demographics, and
which sample they were a part of.

Closeness Did Not Matter for Missed Posts

We used binary logistic regression to identify influences on
the likelihood of a respondent noticing a post that he (or she)
had not seen in the News Feed, when visiting the Timelines of
specific Friends. The dataset consists of multiple responses
from each respondent, one per Friend selected at the begin-
ning of the survey. We chose not to use a multilevel model,
and instead pooled across respondents so that we could use
measured variables to control for individual differences such
as age, gender, Facebook activity, etc. The regression results
are presented in Table 2.

The Intercept in this model (-1.29, SE=0.07) represents the
log odds of noticing missed posts by men from the MTurk
sample who remembered their Friend’s last post being more
recent than it actually was, and who are at the median on
manual curation behaviors, Facebook visit and post frequency
and age, and of average internet literacy. When the Intercept
is exponentiated and transformed into a probability, we find
that there is a 22% chance these respondents would say YES,
they missed posts from a particular Friend.

Contrary to our expectations, closeness had no distinguish-
able effect on the likelihood of experiencing a missed post
(OR=1.002) and was not statistically significant (95% CI
[0.98, 1.03]). This means that whether or not a respondent
noticed a missed post was not meaningfully related to how
close the respondent is to each Friend. Also, the number of
different manual curation behaviors respondents used to con-
trol what they see in their News Feeds had only a very small
positive and statistically significant effect on the dependent
variable (OR=1.03). This means that for every additional
manual curation behavior type that respondents reported us-
ing, the odds of noticing a missed post increase by a factor of
1.03 (95% CT [1.00,1.05]).

The two largest effects were Facebook visit frequency
(OR=0.85) and memory accuracy (OR Older|Accurate=1.09;
OR Older|Newer=2.25). This means that respondents who
visit Facebook more often are LESS likely to notice missed
posts on their Friends’ Timelines, and if a Friend’s most re-
cent post is newer than the respondent remembered they are
MORE likely to notice a missed post on the Friend’s Time-
line. Both of these results make intuitive sense: a person who
visits Facebook many times during the day is likely to be ex-
posed to a greater variety of posts than someone who, say,
only visits Facebook on the weekends. Also, a recent post
that is newer than the respondent remembered is either an in-
dication of a post the respondent didn’t attend to or wasn’t
shown.

The practical significance of these effects is easier to under-
stand as the percent likelihood of particular outcomes occur-
ring. If auser visits Facebook about once per week, and views
a Friend’s Timeline whose last post is older than she remem-
bered, these results say there is a 31% chance that she will
notice a post that she had not seen in her News Feed (see the
predicted probabilities generated from the regression model,
in Figure 1). However, if she visits Facebook several times
per day, and she accurately remembers when her Friend last
posted, there’s a 23% chance she will notice a post she hadn’t
seen in your News Feed. The magnitude of this effect sur-
prised us—this means that even for frequent Facebook users
and the Friends whose posts they attend to, there was still a 1
in 5 chance that visiting that Friend’s Timeline will reveal a
missed post.

Greater Closeness is Associated with More Surprise

We used an ordered multinomial logistic regression to esti-
mate the likelihood of a respondent experiencing surprise at
a missed post, with a dataset that included only the Friends
 

 

 

notice.missing surprise
No = 6105 No = 912
Yes = 2335 Neutral = 461
Yes = 962
Model Term Coef. SE OR Coef. SE OR Variable Info
Intercept No-Yes -1.286 *** (0.072) 0.276 -0.490 *** (0.121) 0.613 No-Neutral Intercept
0.382** (0.121) 1.465 Neutral-Yes Intercept

closeness (F) 0.002 (0.012) 1.002 0.189 ** (0.021) 1.208 Median = 3, Range = 1-7
memory: accurate (F) 0.095 (0.071) 1.099 -0.304 *« (0.119) 0.738 n (all)=5097, n (missed)=1244
memory: newer post (F) 0.813 *** (0.080) 2.254 -0.129 (0.130) 0.879 n (all)=1889, n (missed)=747
curation behaviors 0.025 * (0.011) 1.025 0.021 (0.018) 1.021 Median = 6, Range = 1-10
FB visit frequency -0.166 *** (0.040) 0.847 0.208 (0.064) = 1.232 Median = “Several times per day”
FB post frequency 0.049«* (0.019) 1.050 0.070 * (0.031) 1.073 Median = “A few times per week”
# of Facebook Friends 0.040 (0.026) 1.040 -0.011 (0.042) 0.989 Median = “101-300 Friends”
internet literacy 0.190 *** (0.030) 1.209 -0.148 * (0.048) 0.863 Mean = 3.14, SD = 0.99
age 0.002 (0.025) 1.002 0.034 (0.041) 1.035 Median = “26-34”
gender: woman 0.000 (0.053) 1.000 -0.097 (0.085) 0.907 men = 451, women = 488
sample: Qualtrics -0.077 (0.061) 0.926 0.611 ** (0.099) 1.842 Qualtrics = 475, MTurk = 464
AIC 9710.70 4712.43
Pseudo-F? 0.027 0.047
Dataset All Missed Posts
Total N 8440 friends 2335 friends

 

Signif. codes: 0 “***’ 0.001 *** 0.01 ** 0.05 °” 0.1 °”

1

Table 2. Regression results for notice.missing and surprise. The intercept coefficients represent the log odds of a male MTurk respondent moving up
one category (e.g., from No to Yes) in the dependent variable, when a Friend with whom he reports median closeness had last posted longer ago than he
remembered. All other variables are centered at the median, except for internet literacy, which is centered at the mean. OR = Odds Ratio. (F) = friend

level variable. Pseudo-R? is McFadden’s.

| | Longer ago than memory

T T T T
About once per week Afew times per week About once per day Several times per day
Facebook Visit Frequency

Accurate memory More recent than memory

 

°

Predicted Probability
°

2
1

 

 

0.04

 

Figure 1. Predicted probability of noticing a missed post when visiting a
Friend’s timeline, by Facebook visit frequency and accuracy of respon-
dents’ memories for when the Friend’s most recent post was created.

for whom each respondent had noticed a missed post. This
model has the same set of predictors as the previous one. The
Facebook activity and demographics variables are likewise
centered at the median, except for internet literacy which is
centered at the mean.

There are three potential outcomes for the dependent variable
in this regression: “Not Surprised (No)”, “Neutral”, and “Sur-
prised (Yes)”. The conceptual equivalent of the intercept in a
binary logistic regression is to calculate the predicted proba-
bilities of this model holding all other variables at the refer-
ence categories (Man, MTurk, “Longer ago than memory”),
and 0 for the centered Facebook activity and demographic
variables. We find that under those conditions, there is a 38%
chance that a respondent will report “Not Surprised”, a 21%
chance that they would report “Neutral”, and a 40% chance
that they would be surprised at noticing a missed post from a
Friend of closeness 3 (the median level of closeness).

As expected, closeness had a fairly large, positive, statisti-
cally significant relationship (0.189, SE=0.021) with the like-
lihood of feeling surprised at a missed post. For every one
point increase in closeness, the odds of moving up one cate-
gory (No to Neutral, or Neutral to Yes) increase by a factor of
1.21. Respondents who reported feeling closer to a particular
Facebook Friend were indeed more surprised to find missed
posts. Surprisingly, the number of different manual curation
behaviors respondents engaged in had only a small positive
effect that was not statistically significant (0.021, SE=0.018).
We had expected that using more different ways to curate
one’s News Feed would result in less surprise, because re-
spondents would be more engaged and invested in making
surprise *No= Neutral # Yes

 

Longer ago than memory

- = T a a
ca
x - ma
a” w

Accurate memory More recent than memory

 

5

Predicted Probability
a

6

°
i}
#

 

 

 

 

 

6 2 4 6 2
Closeness (1=lowest, 7=highest)

Figure 2. Predicted probability of a Qualtrics respondent being sur-
prised about a missed post, by closeness and accuracy of the respon-
dent’s memories for when the Friend’s most recent post was created.

sure some posts appear and others do not.

The likelihood of experiencing surprise about a missed post
was less for those respondents who had accurate memory for
when their Friend’s last post took place (-0.304, SE=0.119),
and also for respondents whose Friend’s last post was newer
than he or she remembered (compared with the Intercept,
which represents Friends for whom the most recent post was
older than the respondent remembered). This was contrary
to our predictions. Believing that one’s friend posted longer
ago than they actually did is an indication that the respondent
is not attending closely to the respondent’s posts, which we
had thought would be acknowledged by respondents register-
ing less surprise. However, it seems that more attention was
associated with less surprise at missed posts.

The predicted probabilities in Figure 2 illustrate this pattern.
This graph shows the predicted probability for a man from
the Qualtrics sample feeling surprise at a missed post, for
each level of memory accuracy and closeness, and all other
variables held at the mean or median. At the low end of close-
ness, the likelihood of surprise is 53% for a respondent with
accurate memory for when the Friend’s most recent post took
place. For the median level of closeness (3), that increases to
62%, and for Friends of closeness 7, the probability of sur-
prise at a missed post jumps to 78%. Said another way, our
results indicate that if a user visits four close friends’ time-
lines and finds posts he did not see in his News Feed, for
three of those friends this will come as a surprise.

Agreement with Explanations for Missed Posts

In the MTurk survey, respondents rated their agreement with
a series of possible explanations for why they thought they
missed these posts. The reasons came from a bottom-up anal-
ysis of a subset of responses to an open-ended question in the
Qualtrics survey asking “Do you ever feel like you are miss-
ing posts from Friends in your News Feed? If so, why do you
think this happens? If not, why not?” These reasons we iden-
tified included (1=Strongly Disagree, 5=Strongly Agree):

- I don’t spend a lot of time going through my News Feed
(dont.spend.time, M=2.31, SD=1.12)

- I don’t scroll down to see older posts in my News Feed
(dont.scroll.down, M=2.46, SD=1.21)

- I don’t always read every post when I browse my News Feed
(dont.read.every.post, M=3.06, SD=1.26)

- I’ve previously used the News Feed settings to hide posts from X
(hid.Friends.posts, M=1.70, SD=1.05)

- There are so many posts from X that I don’t always see every one
(too.many.posts, M=2.55, SD=1.29)

- Facebook doesn’t show me posts like this in the News Feed
(dont.see.posts.like.this, M=2.50, SD=1.10)

- Ido not interact (comment, like, share) with X’s posts very often
(dont.interact.w.posts, M=3.29, SD=1.32)

- Facebook must think I don’t want to see X’s posts

(fb.not.interesting, M@=3.06, SD=1.22)

X is not popular enough on Facebook for me to see all of his or

her posts (Friend.not.popular, M=2.27, SD=1.06)

Facebook thinks X and I are not good Friends (fb.not.close,

M=2.97, SD=1.23)

- I didn’t see it because I wasn’t tagged in it (not-tagged, M=2.60,
SD=1.17)

- The post is too new for me to have seen it yet (post.too.new,
M=2.05, SD=1.15)

Figure 3 plots the mean agreement with each explanation
against the level of surprise reported by respondents for
each Friend, with a different line representing each level
of closeness. The highest mean agreement overall was
for dont.interact.w.posts, “I do not interact (comment, like,
share) with X’s posts very often”. Means for Friends of close-
ness 1 or 2 (the low end of the closeness scale) are clearly
higher than all other levels of closeness. “Facebook thinks X
and I are not good Friends” (fb.not.close) showed a similar
pattern. This difference makes sense, because both of these
explanations draw on different ways to represent closeness of
the respondent’s relationship with his or her Friend.

There was a slight upward trend for Friends of closeness 4-
7 (the high end of the closeness scale) on fb.not.close, in-
dicating that if they missed a post from a close Friend and
were surprised about it, they agreed more with the explana-
tion that the News Feed did not show the post because the
system had inferred they are not good Friends. This seems to
be an acknowledgement from respondents that the News Feed
algorithm is working to shape their experiences on Facebook
based on relationship closeness. Likewise, slight agreement
with the explanation “Facebook must think I don’t want to see
X’s posts” (fb.nor. interesting) represents an understanding on
the part of the respondent that Facebook is choosing to show
some posts and not others.

A very slight downward trend for dont.interact.w.posts, “I do
not interact (comment, like, share) with X’s posts very often’,
indicates that for some levels of closeness respondents who
were more surprised about missed posts thought their level
of interaction with posts from that person was not a good ex-
planation for why the posts didn’t appear in the News Feed.
This could indicate that one’s interaction history with a par-
ticular Friend is not a good proxy for the closeness construct
we measured in the survey.

Respondents commonly agreed with the explanation, “I don’t
always read every post when I browse my News Feed”
(dont.read.every.post) at lower levels of surprise, whereas
closeness —1--2—'3. 4 5--6—7

 

fb.not.close dont.interact.w.posts. fb.not.interesting friend.not.popular

 

Lot=

Sn" o

vo
= aatTETESS
it || 47 chy te oa

 

oy
gw Zn||.
—~

7 /

~
¢

 

dont.see.posts.like.this|| dont.read.every.post hid. friends.posts dont.scroll.down

 

te!
5 y

7, || pares,
aml =

dont.spend.time

x

4
eee
valle oo.

post.too.new

o
N
Ps,

“7

Ny

 

 

too.many.posts.

 

Mean Agreement with Explanation

»

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

/
3) AS he ea! a5
een, | pA PRG, | ERS |. ae :
247 es ealecA ba Bem
lf / 7

 

410 05 00 05 1010 05 00 05 1010 05 00 05 1010 05 00 05 10
Level of Surprise: < O = Not Surprised, O=Neutral, > O = Surprised

Figure 3. Means for respondent agreement with the “Reasons why you
might have missed post(s)” questions. The scale ranged from “Strongly
Disagree” (1) to “Strongly Agree” (5). The x-axis shows level of surprise
at having missed a post from each Friend, and each line represents a
different level of reported closeness with each Friend (1=low, 7=high).

when surprise was high they disagreed with this explanation.
This indicates that missed posts due to inattention seemed
more plausible to respondents when they were not surprised,
than when they were. It seems like it would be easy for re-
spondents to just assume they must have skipped over a post
they feel like they didn’t really want to see anyway; however,
for posts they felt like they wanted to see but did not, this ex-
planation would not be sensible. This pattern is evidence for
the idea that the feeling of surprise at a missed post might be
an indicator of an unexpected system behavior.

Finally, agreement was universally low for “I’ve previ-
ously used the News Feed settings to hide posts from X”
(hid.Friends.posts), indicating that most of the time respon-
dents believed it was NOT their own action that caused the
particular post not to appear. Agreement was also low across
all levels of closeness for “The post is too new for me to have
seen it yet” (post.too.new), which was a check we used to
make sure respondents weren’t answering these questions in
response to posts that had been created while they were com-
pleting the survey.

Limitations

Our survey asked respondents only a Yes or No question
about whether there was a post on their Friend’s Timeline
that they didn’t remember seeing in their News Feeds. We
didn’t ask respondents to count how many posts they missed,
nor for any data about the posts themselves, because we were
sensitive to the privacy of the Friends of our respondents. So,
we can’t make any claims about characteristics of posts that
are more or less likely to be attended to by users or filtered by
the News Feed algorithm, or how many posts users missed.

Also, we can’t say whether the missed posts actually did not
display in the News Feed. A respondent might have read

10

a post and forgotten about it, or skipped some posts while
scrolling, or not scrolled down far enough to see them. How-
ever, it is also possible that they were not displayed at all.
We cannot disambiguate these potential explanations for why
respondents perceived that posts were missed.

DISCUSSION

Up to now, we have been careful to refer to posts as “missed”
rather than “missing”, to avoid judgments about agency or
cause when reporting our results. Posts could have been
missed by respondents because they did not attend to or re-
member them, or because they were never displayed in the
News Feed. However, we feel that because closeness had
no bearing on whether respondents missed posts, but had a
strong relationship with the likelihood of experiencing sur-
prise at encountering one of these posts, we can reasonably
conceptualize these two kinds of situations differently from
each other. Missed vs. missing is an interesting distinction
that the surprise dependent variable allows us to make. Some
missed posts were not surprising for respondents; these are
the ones that Facebook says in their blog users probably don’t
want to see anyway. These are the situations where, if in fact
these posts were hidden, the News Feed algorithm is working
as expected [4].

We conceptualize the posts respondents were surprised they
didn’t remember seeing in their News Feeds as “missing”
rather than missed, because that feeling is a clue that an ex-
pectation violation has occurred. We know that understand-
ing the behavior of systems is very hard for human beings,
because people tend to use heuristics to interpret cause and
effect that assume only one thing happens at a time and ev-
erything they know about happens in order [28]. Surprising
outcomes tend to signal that people don’t understand the in-
fluences on a system’s behavior.

We opened this paper wondering about whether algorithmic
curation on Facebook might have effects that can be detected
at the individual level. Assume for a moment that a feedback
loop exists here, and that users are missing at least a few posts
from close friends that they feel like they should have seen.
Overall, at the system level, this is likely not a problem. Users
are still contributing content, and their Friends are still seeing
posts. But what about individual-level outcomes? Assuming
that respondents were being honest when they answered the
survey questions and that they did indeed miss posts and feel
more surprise about missed posts from closer friends, we be-
lieve missing posts might signal a system-level pattern in the
News Feed that has undesirable individual-level outcomes.

We know that people use Facebook for maintaining relation-
ships, for reconnecting and keeping up with those they care
about. However, there are reasons why it might make sense
that a curation algorithm might not prioritize posts from peo-
ple users feel closest to. Although individuals are capable
of growing closer by way of communicating on Facebook,
there is also research to suggest that close ties are not only
communicating on Facebook. In a study of distance learn-
ers, Haythornthwaite [23] found that stronger ties between
pairs were associated with the use of more different media to
communicate whereas weaker ties were associated with the
use of fewer communication media. This work was later ex-
tended to friend relationships by Ledbetter [27] who found
that increased use of different kinds of online and offline com-
munication media helped to predict levels of interdependence
between friends.

The communication of stronger ties across myriad channels
bears potentially significant implications for personalization
algorithms that rely on behavioral traces and interactions to
prioritize relevant content to users. Users may be communi-
cating more with certain Friends in other channels, rendering
the appearance of their relational strength with these friends
to be similar to weak ties on Facebook for whom Facebook
may be their only mode of communication. The News Feed’s
algorithm may not have enough information about users’ be-
haviors outside of the platform to accurately predict who is
deemed more important to see represented in the News Feed
than others.

Communication on Facebook is both output from and input to
the News Feed algorithm. Burke and Kraut [7] provided very
strong evidence that communication on Facebook, as opposed
to other channels, impacts the strength of users’ relationships.
If a part of the News Feed algorithm uses a behavioral proxy
for closeness in determining which posts to display, this could
have significant consequences for real relationships. We be-
lieve the closeness result might be a symptom of a feedback
loop—a filter bubble for relationships—that has the potential
to affect who people are close to. In essence: if I don’t see
your posts, I won’t be reminded to communicate with you on
Facebook. If I don’t communicate with you on Facebook, the
News Feed will think we aren’t close friends. If the News
Feed thinks we are not close friends, it won’t show me your
posts. The behavioral traces, which are all Facebook has to
go on when inferring the strength of friendships, go away.
“Missing” posts become “missed”. But because filtering is
invisible, on a post-by-post basis it is hard for users to be
aware that this is happening.

One strategy for overcoming the filter bubble (also es-
poused by Pariser in his information diet metaphor [30])
is to include some “preference-inconsistent” information, to
reduce confirmation bias. In the News Feed, that might
look like occasionally bringing back posts from people
users—or the algorithm—have previously hidden. However,
Schwind et al. [34] found that when given the choice, par-
ticipants preferred choosing preference-consistent arguments
over preference-inconsistent ones to read more about. To gen-
eralize this to the News Feed, it seems like the preference-
inconsistent posts would be the ones the users would be most
likely to skip over or choose to hide. Also, this tweak would
have system-level effects too, just different ones!

We are not trying to argue that the News Feed is broken and
that it should show users everything their friends post. Rec-
ommender systems and algorithmic curation are a necessary
and beneficial part of the infrastructure of a socio-technical
system. But, at the same time, because filtering is invisible,
users don’t know the extent to which their choices are con-
strained so they can’t help the system self-correct. Cosley
et al. [10] and others have found that users of recommender

systems have some sensitivity for deliberately incorrect or
manipulated ratings. Without some reason to go looking for
missed posts, what is there for users to suspect? This is a
difficult tension for designers of socio-technical systems to
navigate.

Our advice based on this work is that designers of socio-
technical systems should develop conceptual and functional
requirements both at the individual and system level, and that
involve interactions among all the parts of the system: human,
technology, and information. Then, do periodic testing to find
out whether both levels of outcomes fall within expectations.
This testing must be repeated, because it is only possible to
see these patterns as they develop over time. The Facebook
News Feed is an instructive case study, but algorithms make
decisions that constrain user behavior in a wide variety of
socio-technical systems, from search engines to self-driving
cars. As researchers, we must develop new socio-technical
systems theory and methods that will help practitioners de-
velop tools and metrics to accomplish this task.

ACKNOWLEDGMENTS

We thank Rick Wash and Scott Rucinski for javascript inte-
gration of the Facebook API with the Qualtrics survey; and
the MSU BITLab research group for feedback on the survey
questions and helpful conversations. This material is based
upon work supported by the National Science Foundation un-
der Grant No. IIS-1217212.

REFERENCES
1. Adamic, L. A., and Glance, N. The Political Blogosphere and the 2004
U.S. Election: Divided They Blog. In Proceedings of the 3rd
international workshop on Link discovery, ACM (2005), 36-43.

2. Adomavicius, G., Bockstedt, J. C., Curley, S. P., and Zhang, J. Do
Recommender Systems Manipulate Consumer Preferences? A Study of
Anchoring Effects. Information Systems Research 24, 4 (Dec. 2013),
956-975.

3. Aron, A., Aron, E. N., and Smollan, D. Inclusion of Other in the Self
Scale and the Structure of Interpersonal Closeness. Journal of
personality and social ...63, 4 (1992), 596-612.

4. Backstrom, L. News Feed FYI: A Window Into News Feed.
https://www.facebook.com/business/news/News-Feed-FY I-A-Window-
Into-News-Feed, Aug.

2013.

5. Backstrom, L., Bakshy, E., Kleinberg, J., Lento, T. M., and Rosenn, I.
Center of Attention: How Facebook Users Allocate Attention Across
Friends. JCWSM 201] (2011), 34-41.

6. Burke, M., and Kraut, R. Using Facebook after Losing a Job:
Differential Benefits of Strong and Weak Ties. In CSCW 7/3:
Proceedings of the 2013 conference on Computer supported
cooperative work (June 2013), 1419-1430.

7. Burke, M., and Kraut, R. Growing Closer on Facebook: Changes in Tie
Strength Through Social Network Site Use. In CHI ’14 (Jan. 2014),
1-10.

8. Cass R. Sunstein. Infotopia: How Many Minds Produce Knowledge.
Oxford University Press, 2006.

9. Cheng, J., Danescu-Niculescu-Mizil, C., and Leskovec, J. How
Community Feedback Shapes User Behavior. In JCWSM (2014), 1-10.

10. Cosley, D., Lam, S. K., Albert, ., Konstan, J. A., and Riedl, J. Is seeing
believing?: how recommender system interfaces affect users’ opinions.
In CHI ’03 (Ft. Lauderdale, Florida, USA, 2003), 585-592.

11. Counts, S., and Fisher, K. Taking It All In? Visual Attention in
Microblog Consumption. In JCWSM 20/1 (Apr. 2011), 1-8.
20.

21.

22.

23.

24.

25.

26.

27.

28.

. Duggan, M., and Smith, A. Social Media Update 2013. Tech. rep., Pew

Research Center, Dec. 2013.

. Ekstrand, M. D., Reidl, J. T., and Konstan, J. A. Collaborative Filtering

Recommender Systems. Foundations and Trends in Human-Computer
Interaction 4, 2 (2010), 81-173.

. Ellison, N. B., Lampe, C., Steinfield, C., and Vitak, J. With a little help

from my Friends: Social network sites and social capital. In A
networked self: Identity, community and culture on social network sites,
Z. Papacharissi, Ed. Routledge, New York, NY, June 2010, 124-125.

. Ellison, N. B., Steinfield, C., and Lampe, C. Connection strategies:

Social capital implications of Facebook-enabled communication
practices. New Media & Society 13, 6 (June 2011), 873-892.

. Ellison, N. B., Vitak, J., Gray, R., and Lampe, C. Cultivating Social

Resources on Social Network Sites: Facebook Relationship
Maintenance Behaviors and Their Role in Social Capital Processes.
Journal of Computer-Mediated Communication (2014), n/a-n/a.

. Facebook. How News Feed Works: Facebook Help Center.

https://www.facebook.com/help/327131014036297/, 2014.

. Gilbert, E., Bergstrom, T., and Karahalios, K. Blogs Are Echo

Chambers: Blogs Are Echo Chambers. In HICSS 2009 (2009).

. Gleick, J. The Information: a History, a Theory, a Flood. Pantheon,

2011.

Gomez-Rodriguez, M., Gummadi, K. P., and Scholkopf, B. Quantifying
Information Overload in Social Media and its Impact on Social
Contagions. In JCWSM (2014), 1-10.

Gray, R., Ellison, N. B., Lampe, C., and Vitak, J. Who wants to know?
Question-asking and answering practices among Facebook users. In
Proceedings of the 2013 Conference on computer supported
cooperative work and social computing (June 2013), 1213-1224.

Hargittai, E., and Hsieh, Y. P. Succinct Survey Measures of Web-Use
Skills. Social Science Computer Review 30, 1 (2011), 95-107.

Haythornthwaite, C. Social networks and Internet connectivity effects.
Information, Communication & Society 8, 2 (June 2005), 125-147.

Hill, W. C., Hollan, J. D., Wroblewski, D., and McCandless, T. Edit
wear and read wear. In Proceedings of the SIGCHI conference on
Human factors in computing systems - CHI’92, ACM Press (New
York, New York, USA, 1992), 3-9.

Hodas, N. O., Kooti, F., and Lerman, K. Friendship Paradox Redux:
Your Friends Are More Interesting Than You. In JCWSM 7/3 (Apr.
2013), 1-9.

Hodas, N. O., and Lerman, K. How Visibility and Divided Attention
Constrain Social Contagion. In Socia/Com 2012, IEEE (2012),
249-257.

Ledbetter, A. M. Patterns of media use and multiplexity: Associations
with sex, geographic distance and friendship interdependence. New
Media & Society 11, 7 (June 2009), 1187-1208.

Meadows, D. H. Thinking in Systems: A Primer. Chelsea Green
Publishing, 2008.

12

29.

30.

31.

32.

33.

34.

35.

36.

37.

38.

39.

40.

Al,

42.

43.

44,

Panovich, K., Miller, R. C., and Kraut, R. Tie strength in question &
answer on social network sites. In Proceedings of the ACM 2012
conference on Computer Supported Cooperative Work - CSCW 12
(June 2012), 1057-1066.

Pariser, E. The Filter Bubble: What the Internet is Hiding from you.
Penguin Press HC, The, 2011.

PewResearch Internet Project. Social Networking Fact Sheet.
http://www.pewinternet.org/fact-sheets/social-networking-fact-sheet/,
2013.

Resnick, P., and Sami, R. The Influence Limiter: Provably
Manipulation-Resistant Recommender Systems. In RecSys ’07 (2007),
25-32.

Roberts, S. G. B., Dunbar, R. L M., Pollet, T. V., and Kuppens, T.
Exploring variation in active network size: Constraints and ego
characteristics. Social Networks 31, 2 (May 2009), 138-146.

Schwind, C., Buder, J. u. r., and Hesse, F. W. I Will Do It, but I Don’t
Like It: User Reactions to Preference-Inconsistent Recommendations.
In CHI 2011 (2011), 349-352.

Sharma, A., and Cosley, D. Do Social Explanations Work? Studying
and Modeling the Effects of Social Explanations in Recommender
Systems. In WWW 7/3 (2013), 1133-1143.

Sharma, A., Gemici, M., and Cosley, D. Friends, Strangers, and the
Value of Ego Networks for Recommendation. In JCWSM 713 (2013),
721-724.

Sosik, V. S., and Bazarova, N. N. Relational maintenance on social
network sites: How Facebook communication predicts relational
escalation. Computers in Human Behavior 35 (June 2014), 124-131.

Steinfield, C., Ellison, N. B., and Lampe, C. Social capital, self-esteem,
and use of online social network sites. Journal of Applied
Developmental Psychology 29 (June 2008), 434-445.

Subrahmanyam, K., Reich, S. M., Waechter, N., and Espinoza, G.
Online and offline social networks. Journal of Applied Developmental
Psychology 29, 6 (Nov. 2008), 420-433.

Sukumaran, A., Vezich, S., McHugh, M., and Nass, C. Normative
influences on thoughtful online participation. In Proceedings of the
2011 annual conference on Human factors in computing systems, ACM
(2011), 3401-3410.

Tong, S. T., and Walther, J. B. Relational Maintenance and CMC.
Computer-mediated communication in personal relationships (June
2011), 98-118.

Tufekci, Z. GROOMING, GOSSIP, FACEBOOK AND MYSPACE.
Information, Communication & Society 11, 4 (June 2008), 544-564.

Vitak, J., and Ellison, N. B. ’There’s a network out there you might as
well tap”. New Media & Society 15, 2 (June 2013), 243-259.

Wells, T., and Link, M. Facebook User Research Using a
Probability-Based Sample and Behavioral Data. Journal of Computer
Mediated Communication (Jan. 2014), n/a—n/a.
APPENDIX

Sample Information

Qualtrics Sample
N =475 respondents, 3800 Friends
Date collected: 2014-04-02 — 2014-04-07

MTurk Sample
N = 464 respondents, 4640 Friends
Date collected: 2014-04-16 — 2014-04-21

Instructions

LOG_IN_TO_FACEBOOK First, verify that you are logged in to Face-
book, and allow access to your Friend list.

If you are already logged in to Facebook, your name should appear in BOLD
text below. If not, please click the "Log In” button and enter your username
and password in the window that appears. Then, click "Okay” to allow the
survey to use a Facebook app to access your Friend list. At the end of this
survey, you will be provided instructions for removing the application. Even
if you do not remove it, it will not do anything once you have completed the
survey.

Please note: if you do not approve the application, you are not eligible to
complete the survey.

You are currently logged in to Facebook as <RESPONDENT>.
[ Click here ] to change the account you are using.

-OR-

You are not currently logged into Facebook.
[ Facebook Log In button ]

SELECT_CLOSE_FRIENDS Next, select 5 close friends.

Who are the people you feel closest to? This might include people you dis-
cuss important matters with, really enjoy socializing with, or anyone else
you feel especially close to. Select exactly 5 people. Please do not select any
friends who are under the age of 18, or any names that do NOT represent
actual friends (businesses, pets, etc.).

[ Click here ] to select close friends.

SELECT_RANDOM_FRIENDS Now, review friends selected by the sur-
vey.

Next, we will show you some of your Facebook friends, that you did not
already select. These friends have been randomly selected by the survey.
Please click to deselect any friends who you do NOT want to answer ques-
tions about. Also, please deselect friends who are under the age of 18, and
any names that do NOT represent actual friends (businesses, pets, etc.).

[ Click here ] to review randomly chosen friends.

13

Survey Questions and Descriptives

CLOSENESS How close do you feel to X?

 

Close Random
QUALTRICS M=4.54, SD=2.14 M=2.28, SD=1.76
MTURK M=4.25, SD=1.81 M=2.11, SD=1.44

 

LAST_POST_ESTIMATE (Friend-level) How recently would you esti-
mate was the last time X posted on Facebook, without looking at his or her
Timeline?

 

 

 

QUALTRICS Within the past day 1131
Within the past week but not within the past day 1046
Within the past month but not within the past week 620
More than a month ago 482
Not at all 203
I don’t know 318
MTURK Today <Date> 672
Yesterday <Date> 995
Within the past week (<Day>, <Date>), but not yes- 1448
terday or today
More than a week ago, but within the past month (since 673
<Day>, <Date>)
More than a month ago 552
I don’t know 300

 

WHEN-POSTED_ACTUAL (Friend-level) How recently did X create a
post? Please note: this does not include instances when *other* friends
posted on X’s Timeline; only when X him or herself posted or instances
in which X changed their profile or cover photo.

 

 

 

QUALTRICS Today 891
Yesterday 632
Within the past week but not as recently as yesterday 963
Not at all within the past week 1314
MTURK Today <Date> 905
Yesterday <Date> 828
Within the past week (<Day>, <Date>), but not yes- 1272
terday or today
More than a week ago, but within the past month (since 718
<Day>, <Date>)
More than a month ago 846
I don’t know 71

 

NOTICE.MISSING (Friend-level) When you were scrolling through X’s
Timeline, did you notice posts he or she created that you don’t remember
seeing in your News Feed?

 

 

 

QUALTRICS Yes 965
No 2835
MTURK Yes 1370
No 3270

 
SURPRISED (Friend-level) HOW_OFTEN-VISIT_FB How often do you usually VISIT Facebook?

 

QUALTRICS: How much do you agree with the statement, “I feel

 

 

 

surprised that I did not see X’s post(s) in my News Feed”? about ones per day times per day 00
Strongly agree (1) 125 A few times per week 240
Agree (2) 142 About once per week 48
Somewhat agree (3) 230
Neither agree nor disagree (4) 207
Somewhat disagree (5) 96 MTURK Several times per day 3610
Disagree (6) 116 About once per day 630
Strongly disagree (7) 49 A few times per week 320
NA’s 2835 About once per week 80

 

MTURK: Please indicate your level of agreement from “Strongly

disagree” to “Strongly agree”: I am surprised that I did not see X’s post(s)
in my News Feed.

 

 

 

POST_FREQUENCY How often do you usually POST to Facebook?

(status updates, links, photos, videos, or other content)

 

Strongly agree (5) 112 -

Agree (4) 353 Several times per day 1158

Neither agree nor disagree (3) 254 About once per day 1148

Disagree (2) 430 A few times per week 1852

Strongly disagree (1) 92] About once per week 1378

NA’s 3270 Less than once per week 2700
Never 204

REASONS_MISSED_POSTS (MTurk only) Below are the possible rea-
sons why you might have missed post(s) on Facebook from X. Please indicate
your level of agreement from “Strongly disagree” to “Strongly agree”.

 

 

 

EVER_DONE_CURATION_BEHAVIORS Have you ever done any of

the following actions? Check all that apply.

 

 

 

vo
Es s
a vo
“
< 3
g g > 2
z 2 2 g
a] bb @ 5 3
=> gs ze s &
g Ss
& 4 Z a & Unfriend or block a person 7166 = =1274
7 7 Unfollow a person 5230 3210
Idon’t spend a lot of time going through 9358 533 224 208 47 “Unlike” a page 6042 2398
my News Feed . Turn OFF notifications for a page 4566 3874
I don’t scroll down to see older posts in 343 482 «185 294 66 Click “I don’t want to see this” to hide a post 5890 2550
my News Feed Click “Hide all” to remove all stories froma 4208 4232
I don’t always read every post whenI 209 285 227 507 142 person, page or group
, browse my News Feed Turn ON notifications for a Friend’s activity 2882 5558
I’ve previously used the News Feed set- 813 333 94 86 44 Add someone to your Close Friends list 3708 4732
tings to hide posts from X “Like” a page 8110 330
There are so many posts from X thatI 345 428 209 271 117 Use sorting options for your News Feed (e.g., 4560 3880
don’t always see every one . Top Stories, Most Recent, other friend
Facebook doesn’t show me posts like 271 487 317 246 49 lists, etc.)
this in the News Feed None of the above 104 8336
Ido not interact (comment, like, share) 169 280 179 471 271
with X’s posts very often
Facebook must think Idon’t wanttosee 189 282 298 463 138
X’s posts
X is not popular enough on Facebook 356 534 269 179 32
for me to see all of his or her posts
Facebook thinks X and I are not good §=213 289 «331 = 402— 135
friends
Ididn’t see it because I wasn’t taggedin 295 378 334 309 54
it
The post is too new forme tohave seen 542 491 115 170 52

it yet

 

14
INTERNET_LITERACY How familiar are you with the following ETHNICITY What is your ethnicity?

Internet-related terms? Please rate your familiarity with each term below
from None (no understanding) to Full (full understanding):

 

What is your ethnicity? (Check all that apply.) Cau- 784

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

casian/White
African American 68
QUALTRICS Native American 18
Asian 63
v v uv 3 +
5 8 E 3 3 Pacific Islander 6
42 4 4 oO & Hispanic/Latino 51
Wiki 113 62 77 113° 110 Other 8
Netiquette 281 51 53 45 45
Phishing 138 67 89 85 96
Bookmark 49 32 77 117 200 EDUCATION What is the last grade or class you completed in school?
Cache 105 85 «98 98 89
SSL 288 80 57 31 19 None, or grades 1-8 0
AJAX 401 37 24 6 7 Some high school 31
Filtibly 413, 34-28 0 0 High school graduate or GED certificate 193
Technical, trade, or vocational school AFTER high 66
school
Some college, no 4-year degree 330
MTURK Four-year college degree 255
2 8 zs 3 = Post-graduate training or professional school after col- 64
° =a oO 9° 3 lege
Zz 4 “A Oo a 8
Wiki 8 8 47 139° 262
Netiquett 127 50 63 101 123
Phishing ° 23 38 91 132. 180 INCOME Last year, how much was your household income, before taxes?
Bookmark 11 5 20 97 331 Less than $10,000 85
Cache 21 39 86 157 161
$10,000 to less than $20,000 124
SSL 99 107 107 78 73
$20,000 to less than $30,000 141
AJAX 281 94 47 21 21
Filtibl 303 46 25 0 0 $30,000 to less than $40,000 135
ey $40,000 to less than $50,000 108
$50,000 to less than $75,000 184
$75,000 to less than $100,000 91
$100,000 or more 70
GENDER What is your gender?
Man 451
Woman 488

 

15
