 
Journal Address

Program Studi Ilmu Komunikasi Fakultas Ilmu Sosial dan Ilmu Politik
UNIVERSITAS MUHAMMADIYAH TANGERANG

JI. Mayjen Sutoyo No. 2 (depan Lap. A. Yani) Kota Tangerang, Banten, Indonesia
Website : http://jurnal.umt.ac.id/index.php/nyimak

Email : journalnyimak@fisipumt.ac.id
NYIMAK

Journal of Communication

DAFTAR ISI (TABLE OF CONTENT)

Multimodal Analysis of Photos in @Sandiuno Instagram Account
Before and After the 2019 Presidential Election
—kKiemas Dita Anugrah Susetya and lis Kurnia Nurhayati—

Representation of Black Feminism in Hidden Figures
—Andre Ikhsano and Jakarudi—

Understanding The Problem of Control and Ownership of Mojok.co: Is
It Still Alternative?
—Muria Endah Sokowati and Fajar Junaedi—

Analysis of The Filter Bubble Phenomenon in The Use of Online
Media for Millennial Generation (An Ethnography Virtual Study about
The Filter Bubble Phenomenon)

—Sri Seti Indriani, Ditha Prasanti, and Rangga Saptya Mohammad
Permana—

Political Agonism for Indonesian Cyberpolitic: Critical Cyberculture to
Political Campaign of 2019 Indonesian Presidential Election in Twitter
—Henni Gusfa and Fransiskus Emilus D. Kadjuand—

Discursive Intertextualities of RuangGuru due COVID-19 by the
Governor of Central Java

—Cosmas Gatot Haryono, Rustono Farady Marta, and Maichel
Chinmi—

Analysis of the Convergence Communication Model on Waste Bank
Program Stakeholders in South Tangerang City, Indonesia

—Mirza Shahreza, Sarwititi Sarwoprasodjo, Hadi Susilo Arifin, and
Dwi Retno Hapsari—

157 — 168
169 — 180
181-198
199 — 209
211-232
233 — 247
249 — 265
Communication Patterns in the Development of Life Skills at the 267 —278
Darul Fallah Islamic Boarding School in Bogor Regency

—Eko Purwanto, Sumardjo, Dwi Retno Hapsari, and Cahyono Tri

Wibowo—

Mediating the Lifestyle of Metrosexual on Instagram 279 —294
(#priadewasa,#ganteng): Consumption and Identity
—Rama Kertamukti—
Nyimak Journal of Communication

Vol. 4, No. 2, September 2020, pp. 199-209

P-ISSN 2580-3808, E-ISSN 2580-3832

Article Submitted 27 March 2020 @ Revised 21 August 2020 ™@ Accepted 25 August 2020

 

Analysis of The Filter Bubble Phenomenon in The Use of Online Media for
Millennial Generation (An Ethnography Virtual Study about The Filter
Bubble Phenomenon)

Sri Seti Indriani*, Ditha Prasanti?, Rangga Saptya Mohammad Permana?
123 Fakultas Ilmu Komunikasi Universitas Padjadjaran
JI Raya Bandung — Sumedang KM.21, Jatinangor
Email: rahadianindri@gmail.com', ditha.prasanti@unpad.ac.id?, rangga.saptya@unpad.ac.id?

ABSTRACT

This article describes about phenomenon of Filter Bubble for Millennial Generation in online media. Nowadays,
we know that people in searching information are likely to be unaware that their search has been chosen. What
is most interesting is how people which are aware on how a filter bubble works but seemed to forget when they
search on some information. Researchers and critics are worried because these filters isolate people from getting
the information on what they want not on what they need. People might not realize that they are led to partial
information blindness. This research is acknowledge their awareness on the filter bubble phenomena especially
on Y generation who are believed to be a group of people that adapt fast from the analogue era to the digital
era. How they search information nowadays, how bubble filters add their self-value on things and how they
prevent themselves from being in a bubble. The research was conducted using a qualitative method with an
ethnography virtual approach through LINE group of millennial generation. This approach was to gain more
information on the virtual culture, and this case the filter bubble phenomena. Results shows that most infor-
mants were not aware on the term of ‘Filter Bubble’, but have been assuming it for quite a while. When they were
more informed of this term, they realized that they should be more critical on what they read, and being literated
is a significant competence in this era. Whether or not this filter bubble could construct their identity, some
denied that it didn’t have any relevation while others think that it did give some additional values on it.

Keywords: Filter Bubble, Computer-mediated Communication, ethnography virtual, millennials, and self value

ABSTRAK

Penelitian ini menjelaskan tentang fenomena bubble filter untuk Generasi Milenial di media online. Sekarang
ini, orang-orang dalam mencari informasi cenderung tidak menyadari bahwa pencarian mereka telah dipilih.
Hal paling menarik ialah bagaimana orang-orang yang menyadari cara kerja bubble filter tetapi menjadi lupa
ketika mereka mencari informasi. Para peneliti dan kritikus khawatir bubble filter ini mengisolasi orang dari
memperoleh informasi tentang apa yang mereka inginkan, bukan tentang apa yang mereka butuhkan. Orang
mungkin tidak menyadari bahwa mereka dituntun pada kebutaan informasi parsial. Penelitian ini bertujuan
untuk mengetahui kesadaran generasi Y terhadap fenomena bubble filter: cara mereka mencari informasi
saat ini, bagaimana bubble filter menambahkan harga diri mereka pada sesuatu, dan bagaimana mereka
mencegah diri mereka dari berada dalam bubble. Penelitian ini menggunakan pendekatan kualitatif dan
metode etnografi virtual untuk mendapatkan lebih banyak informasi mengenai budaya virtual, knususnya
fenomena bubble filter. Hasil penelitian menunjukkan sebagian besar informan tak mengetahui istilah Filter
Bubble, namun mereka sudah mengasumsikannya cukup lama. Ketika mereka menjadi lebih tahu mengenai
istilah ini, mereka menyadari bahwa mereka harus lebih kritis terhadap apa yang mereka baca, dan menjadi
literated adalah kompetensi yang signifikan di era sekarang ini. Selain apakah bubble filter dapat membentuk
identitas mereka ataukah tidak, beberapa menyangkal bahwa bubble filter tidak memiliki relevansi apa pun,
sementara yang lain tampaknya berpikir bahwa bubble filter memberikan beberapa nilai tambahan.

Kata Kunci: Filter Bubble, computer-mediated communication, etnografi virtual, generasi milenial, nilai diri

 

Citation : Indriani, Sri Seti, Ditha Prasanti & Rangga Saptya Mohammad Permana. (2020). “Analysis of The
Filter Bubble Phenomenon in The Use of Online Media for Millennial Generation (An Ethnography Vir-
tual Study about The Filter Bubble Phenomenon)”. Nyimak Journal of Communication, 4(2): 199-209.

199
Nyimak Journal of Communication, Vol. 4, No. 2, September 2020

 

INTRODUCTION

Nowadays, filter bubble would be one of trending topic in using of online media. As we
know that research about filter bubble has becoming increasingly high, most research about
this phenomenon is about how it works and how it effects people. But, as the fact is not
many researches focused on whether or not people are aware on it. What is more interest-
ing is when people that are aware on how a filter bubble works in gaining information, but
they still search information without realizing that they are in a bubble. People sometimes
explicitly choose their filters, but most hardly even notice that they do (Resnick et al., 2013).

Researchers and critics are worried because these filters isolate people from getting the
information on what they want not on what they need. People might not realize that they are
led to partial information blindness (Haim et al., 2018). People who are issolated with these

filters may build their own believes and might stimulate frictions among other people.

Researches also suggest that when people express themselves online, there is a signifi-
cant effect and also play a key role in creating polarized opinions (Abisheva et al., 2016;
Sagiyanto & Ardiyanti, 2018). Another research found out that even though people were to
see two different information, people would still preferentially select information that rein-
forced their existing attitudes (Liao & Fu, 2013). In ths case, bubbles may shrink further if
they retreat into like-minded safety (Adee, 2016).

On the other hand, the Y generation is unique, because they are the one and only gen-
eration that actually grow in the process from analogue era into the digital era. They seem
to be the group of people that need to adapt the life style rapidly, especially in gaining
information. When the internet was not common, people were to seek information through
newspaper, magazines or news in the television. Generation X is a new group of workers
which were born between 1977 and 1988. They are likely labelled as Millennials or genera-
tion Y. They have unique characteristics, some of them are that they are comfortable with
change, more open and tolerant (Jorgensen, 2003). This generation was introduced with
computer in their early ages and alo used them in their young age. However, the burst of

communication using the internet emerged in the end of the 1990-ies.

This research was intended to acknowledge about the awareness of informants which
are millennials about the filter bubble phenomena, how they search information through the
net, how this filter bubble phenomena construct their additional self-value and how they

prevent themselves from this phenomena.

This research was using ethnography virtual approach emerged quite high in the begin-
ning of the digital era. It is an approach in understanding virtual communities. This study is

to understand on how aware informants on the filter bubble phenomena are. This phenom-

 

200 Sri Seti Indriani, Ditha Prasanti, and Rangga Saptya Mohammad Permana
P-ISSN 2580-3808, E-ISSN 2580-3832

 

ena can also be described as how individuals are trapped in their own chosen information

which were computer mediated.

Computer Mediated Communication

Human communicate, and the computer is one of the medium for people to communi-
cate. Many researches about Computer-mediated communication have been conducted since
the earliest stages in the 1970-ies when e-mails were the first to emerged in exchanging
information (Herring, 2002). Computer-mediated communication (CMC) is a theory which
involves sending messages through computer networks such as the Internet (Liang & Walther,
2015). It is a technological method for facilitating human communicative acts (Walther,
1996). From what Walther stated, these communication acts can be in verbal and nonverbal

communication.

Nowadays when people find information or exchange information through the internet,
people find it easier and easier to understand, not only do people use text messages but
audio-video messages are possible also. CMC system is changing how people communi-
cate, it provides a system of human and computers, absorbs and then extends the advan-
tages of all former formats of communication, embracing the instant interaction of oral
communication, the abstract logics of printing dissemination, and the vivid images of movie
and television (Yu, 2011). Why is CMC relevant with this study? One of the reason is that
Filter Bubble is one of the result in communicating through the internet.

Filter Bubble

Filter Bubble has also been an object of research many times, but most researches are
more to how it works and how it. This study is to acknowledge people from the Y generation
aware on the term of filter bubble and its consequences. Nadiya (2017) said that Hawkins
and Mothersbaugh (2010) mentioned about the Y generation were people who were born in
between 1977 to 1994 (Nadiya, 2017). Whether or not they know how to prevent themselves
trapped in a bubble of contents. Bubble Filter has become a phenomenon from the earliest

era when the new media emerged. However, not many people comprehend this term.

Filter Bubble can be illustrated as a potential online personalisation that effectively
isolates the person from other various perspectives and content. This online recommenda-
tion system is built through algorithms that predict items on what users enjoy the most
(Nguyen et al., 2014). It is an algorithm curation and personalised system in a bubble which

can decrease a person to find other news content cross ideology (Spohr, 2017).

 

Analysis of The Filter Bubble Phenomenon in The Use of Online Media 201
for Millennial Generation (An Ethnography Virtual Study
about The Filter Bubble Phenomenon)
Nyimak Journal of Communication, Vol. 4, No. 2, September 2020

 

Finding information in the net can trap most users in a bubble which prevent them to see
other various content. This bubble can create a constructed perspective. Personalized filters
are sweeping the Web, creating individual universes of information for each of us (Pariser,
2011). This assumed that individual will have their own perspective about something and

believe that it is right, which might be contradictive with other individuals.

However, most research about these polarizing phenomena stated that if people were to
be literated and skilful in searching information in the net, it is unlikely to be trapped in a
bubble. Information research about politics, for example, people who are interested in poli-
tics find social media as an outlet media to provide information. Those who are literate will
not be cocooned in a political echo chamber (Dutton et al., 2019). Though, in some cases,
people that are literated can also be unaware. People at first, are unaware that there is a
mechanical system that happens on the internet, which changes in responding to the users.
The negative effect of the filter is the strengthening of a person’s pretension to be reductive
which leads to a radical attitude. The bubble effect filter, on the other hand, it is a necessary

logarithmic system (Zakaria et al., 2018).

METHOD

This research is to acknowledge on how aware is the Y generation with the Filter Bubble
phenomenon. The Y generation who are believed to be a group of people that adapt fast
from the analogue era to the digital era. The research questions cover how they search
information nowadays, how bubble filters add their self-value on things and how they pre-

vent themselves from being in a bubble.

The research was conducted using a qualitative method with an ethnography virtual
approach. This approach was to gain more information on the virtual culture, and this case
the filter bubble phenomena. Qualitative researchers seek to understand lived experiences
in context and the meanings associated with these experiences, usually from the perspec-
tive of participants. Qualitative data collection typically involves interviews, observations,
and documents studies (Maxwell & Reybold, 2015).

The ethnography approach was to gain a more comprehensive understanding on the
phenomena in the virtual world, as the filter bubble phenomenon exsist more likely there. In
the fact, researches has described data about virtual ethnography from Hine (2001) which
consists of virtual ethnography questions assumptions, different with real-life and phenom-
ena that arise from face-to-face interactions, and the internet changes the understanding of
the ‘location’ of research (Prasanti & Indriani, 2019). Beside that, researchers also said the

same method about from the oldest research before, that ethnography itself is a qualitative

 

202 Sri Seti Indriani, Ditha Prasanti, and Rangga Saptya Mohammad Permana
P-ISSN 2580-3808, E-ISSN 2580-3832

 

research design in which a researcher describes and interprets patterns that are exchanged
and learned from cultural groups about values, habits, beliefs, and language (Indriani &
Prasanti, 2019).

RESULT AND DISCUSSION

Using the ethnography virtual approach means that the research needs to begin in ex-
plaining how a filter bubble works in the online media. Approaches using ethnographic study
of the internet are diverse and various. The methodological approach has broadened and
reformulated through the years such as digital ethnography, ethnography on/of/through the
Internet, connective ethnography, networked ethnography, and cyberethnography (Carter,
2018). Filter bubble for short is a bubble of information that are collected through an allogaritm
system in the net. It creates personalized filters which can be positive and negative for the
users. The Internet create a persistent virtual space that transforms earlier notions of the
imagined society (Shumar & Madison, 2013). This space is assumed to have become a

bubble or a personalized space on which users believe in.

There are some positive sides in this filter bubble phenomena. First, with this filter bubble,
people are not lost in the amount of information. This situation can prevent people from
excessive media exposure. Moreover, in this digital era, new information comes in seconds
and it will be too much for someone to handle. Second, Filter bubbles facilitate our commu-
nal instincts. Especially on social media, we will be more likely to look for similarities from
thousands of friend/follower accounts. Third, filter bubble can actually become an assistant
for people in seeking information because it filters other information that are not needed
(Lumakto, 2018).

On the other side, the negative sides of this filter bubble phenomenon on which why it
has become a virtual problem is what Pariser (2011) wrote about in his book ‘What the
internet is hiding from you’. As mentioned before, filter bubbles are everywhere, especially
on search engines and social media. This bubble shows information related to what we
usually click on or search. Therefore, there are some negative sides. First, people can be
stuck on what is called echo chamber effect. Where people seem to think they know every-
thing. Second, people seem to see things in their own perspective, and the cause of the
filter bubble strengthen their perspective. This reason can add more self-value which makes
a person have a stronger attitude towards something. Third, in some cases it can benefit
advertisements. When people click on an advertisement, then it will show again every time
a person comes back to the internet and people tend to just click on what they see (Pariser,
2011).

 

Analysis of The Filter Bubble Phenomenon in The Use of Online Media 203
for Millennial Generation (An Ethnography Virtual Study
about The Filter Bubble Phenomenon)
Nyimak Journal of Communication, Vol. 4, No. 2, September 2020

 

Information Research in Online Media

Most informants in accessing information through the net, they go to google and look up
to the first 1 until 3 pages, and click the title which are relevant to what they seek. They see
the online media as a gate way to find resources of information. Google has become their
first application to access information. After google gives out its list of answers, most infor-
mants will choose the most reliable web address to seek information. Some said that they
only stop in the first page of what Google offers without clicking the next page. Jerry said
that he would go to google map to seek more detail information. Some others go to Facebook
and Instagram, and just one informant who used another web address which is not quite
familiar Duckduckgo.com.

Informants seemed to have bigger interest in searching information through Google and
Facebook. Galloway stated that there are four which are Amazon, Apple, Facebook, and
Google to be the most influential companies on the planet (Galloway, 2017). Google seemed

to be the best choice for people to seek information.

Filter Bubble Phenomenon Awareness

Some people might not be aware that Google had been customizing its search results
since December 2009. Google has been trying to predict what users most likely to click.

These phenomena lessen people to get a broader popular result (Pariser, 2011).

Four out of seven informants were not aware of the term filter buble, they were quite
surprised and unaware of it. Rita stated that she didn’t even have any idea of what was
happening. As she went through an article about the filter bubble, her first statement was
that she was in shock and saw it as something cunning where a few people could get a lot
of benefits from it which is unfair. Shirin was also unaware with the situation but she was
questioning about it, like Rita, they were questioning why advertisements and news had
almost the same traits. Shirin suspected it already and after she searched more about this
‘filter bubble’ term, her suspicious was right. “At first, | did not know, but after searching, |
finally found out. It is a logarithm that was “intentionally” created by a party to herd an

opinion about a discourse” (Shirin, 2020).

Yo, another informants admitted that he was not aware before but found it as something
very normal and ordinary because he could understand the principleThe other three infor-
mants were aware of this term, but were more familiar with the term ‘polarization’. After
reading more information about the ‘filter bubble’, he assumed that individuals in social
environments, especially when communicating with social media, will not be separated
from the filter bubble. Yo stated that even though an application is free, there will still be

 

204 Sri Seti Indriani, Ditha Prasanti, and Rangga Saptya Mohammad Permana
P-ISSN 2580-3808, E-ISSN 2580-3832

 

advertisements where it can gain profit. Advertising will be very personal when using a
personal algorithm and algorithm can cross-platform. ‘if you open lazada to look for par-
ticular items. Then open FB and IG, then there will be several sponsors related to the searches

we did previously on lazada or google”. (Yo, 2020).

This statement is relevant to what Pariser (2011) mentioned that a personalized world,
people will be shown only news that is convenient and confirms what the people believe in
(Pariser, 2011) What people have clicked before will determine what the people will be
exposed to in the future. Concerning the social environment in social media, at least people

have filtered themselves when they feel uncomfortable with some posts sent.

lan was one of the informants who was also unaware of this term, however he admitted
to have a bit of knowledge on how the system worked. He seemed upset on the phenomena
and sated that he felt that he was controlled by the system and disappointed that he wasn’t
free to choose due to the unlimited information.

The other three informants were aware on this term and were displore of it. Joko felt that
in interacting on social media, he realized that it had a great potential to construct social
media users into boxes. What he meant that, people had become persistant to what they
believe which meant that what they believed was right. This was because they read what
they saw in the media platform and unrealizing the alogaritm system in the net. This could

be potential for conflicts.

Jerry stated that he felt bored on what the media offered him. The news, games and
music were similar. ‘yes | know, like what | experienced on the homepage of youtube, the
algorithmic effect displays film, vlog, music, and games that | have played or downloaded
before, so it is annoying too, what comes out does not come out of the box.’ (Jerry, 2020).
Jerry also felt as he was a fool to read the same information all over again or listen to similar
music.

Some informants say that this phenomenon can have both positive and negative impact
on one’s personalities. It can be harmful when people are not literate and critical in informa-
tion exposure that they receive. They will believe in anything they read, without knowing
whether the information could be fake news. This can increase the hoax spreading and

cause wider negative effects.

Additional Self-Value from Online Media

Filter bubble can easily construct one’s identity or an additional self-value. However,
these informants that are Y generation have self-prevented this situation. Though they say

 

Analysis of The Filter Bubble Phenomenon in The Use of Online Media 205
for Millennial Generation (An Ethnography Virtual Study
about The Filter Bubble Phenomenon)
Nyimak Journal of Communication, Vol. 4, No. 2, September 2020

 

that the information that they get are likely more for adding knowledge but do not seem to
have a big effect on the way they think about things.

The filter bubble phenomena itself however add some self-values about the media itself.
They are more sceptis on what the media provides and are more aware on things that they
read. Though, they admitted that there has been a changing pattern on the way people
choose and buys things.

Prevention from Filter Bubble

Yo determined that people must check every information so that they are not trapped in
the polarization of ideas like frogs in a shell. Yo suggested that experts should use a new
algorithm so that the polarization does not occur that could divide the community. A con-
crete example is during the last presidential election; the community was divided into ‘shucks’
and ‘tadpoles’. Rita now is more aware on this phenomenon, she admitted that she should
be more literated and also read a lot.

And when she does read something, she needs to read from other sources to compare
whether or not the information is true. Other suggestion she mentioned that people shouldn’t
only read what are viral only but others which are not. So, results shows that there are 6
ways in preventing themselves from the bubble:

The first, researchers has seen that informants suggest to click things that are unrelated
to what people like, and what people usually click on, or click to some information that
people might not agree on. This can enrich other perspectives beyond their knowledge.
People should try different things and get out of their safe zone.

The second, Informants suggest to filter themselves. They should develop a more critical
way in thinking and not taking things for granted. They should find more resources that are
credible and trustworthy. People can filter themselves by not clicking on to provocative

titles or titles that can amused us.

Then, the third, researchers also has funded that some suggested to reset back their
username, start everything from the beginning. It would be so hardful for informant, when
they have to start from the first step. The fifth, people should lessen the use of social media
and not depend on it. In this case Joko admitted to erase his Facebook account and rarely
use his Instagram account. If he does use social media, he uses an anonym account which
he believes to be untraceable. The last, based on data of observation through online media,
researchers has seem that informant try not to be controlled by suggestions that the media
offers.

 

206 Sri Seti Indriani, Ditha Prasanti, and Rangga Saptya Mohammad Permana
P-ISSN 2580-3808, E-ISSN 2580-3832

 

CONCLUSIONS

That filter bubble creates a world that is convenient for us alone because it shows and
inform us on what we agree on or what we like about; however, it makes our perspectives

fragmented. The psychological language will emerge as a polarization of ideas among netizens.

Results shows that most informants were not aware on the term of ‘Filter Bubble’, but
have been assumpting it for quite a while. When they were more informed of this term, they
realized that they should be more critical on what they read, and being literated is a signifi-
cant competence in this era. Though, in addition whether or not this filter bubble could
construct their identity, some denied that it didn’t have any relevation while others seemed
to think that it did give some additional values on it. The additional values stated on how
people see informations nowadays, they might be in a filter bubble itself when they are

discussing about the filter bubble phenomena.

Researchers suggests that this phenomenon should be address highly in the media or in
the help from institutions. This awareness may prevent frictions and miscommunication.
There are assumptions from the informants that when individuals are trapped in their filter
bubble, they will only see things in one perspective.

ACKNOWLEDGEMENT

For the publication of this article in the journal of Nyimak, the researcher would like to
express his deepest gratitude for the opportunity given to the researcher. Researchers also
want to thank the informants who have deigned to be informants in this study.

REFERENCES

Abisheva, A., Garcia, D., & Schweitzer, F. (2016). When the filter bubble bursts. 307-308.
https://doi.org/10.1145/2908131.2908180

Adee, S. (2016). Burst the filter bubble. New Scientist, 232(3101), 24-25. https://doi.org/
10.1016/s0262-4079(16)32182-0

Carter, P. (2018). Virtual ethnography. In Social Memory and Heritage Tourism Methodolo-
gies (pp. 48-67). https://doi.org/10.4324/9781315797915-4

Dutton, W. H., Reisdorf, B. C., Blank, G., Dubois, E., & Fernandez, L. (2019). The Internet and
Access to Information about Politics: Searching through Filter Bubbles, Echo Chambers,
and Disinformation. In Society and the Internet: How Networks of information and Com-
munication are Changing Our Lives (pp. 228-247). https://doi.org/10.1093/oso/
9780198843498.003.0014

 

Analysis of The Filter Bubble Phenomenon in The Use of Online Media 207
for Millennial Generation (An Ethnography Virtual Study
about The Filter Bubble Phenomenon)
Nyimak Journal of Communication, Vol. 4, No. 2, September 2020

 

Galloway, S. (2017). The Four: The Hidden DNA of Amazon, Apple, Facebook, and Google |
Scott Galloway {| download. Portfolio.

Haim, M., Graefe, A., & Brosius, H.-B. (2018). Burst of the Filter Bubble? Digital Journalism,
6(3), 330-343. https://doi.org/10.1080/21670811.2017.1338145

Herring, S. C. (2002). Computer-mediated communication on the Internet. Annual Review of
Information Science and Technology, 36, 109-168. https://doi.org/10.1002/
aris.1440360104

Indriani, S. S., & Prasanti, D. (2019). Understanding Multiculturalism in a Family on Whatsapp
Group in the Disruption Era | Indriani | Jurnal The Messenger. Jurnal The Messenger.

Jorgensen, B. (2003). Baby Boomers, Generation X and Generation Y? Foresight, 5(4), 41-49.
https://doi.org/10.1108/14636680310494753

Liang, Y. J., & Walther, J. B. (2015). Computer Mediated Communication. In International
Encyclopedia of the Social & Behavioral Sciences: Second Edition (pp. 504-509). https:/
/doi.org/10.1016/B978-0-08-097086-8.95090-6

Liao, Q. V., & Fu, W.-T. (2013). Beyond the filter bubble. 2359. https://doi.org/10.1145/
2470654.2481326

Lumakto, G. (2018). Mari Memahami Sisi Positif “Filter Bubble” Halaman all -
Kompasiana.com. Kompasiana.

Maxwell, J. A., & Reybold, L. E. (2015). Qualitative Research. In International Encyclopedia
of the Social & Behavioral Sciences: Second Edition (pp. 685-689). https://doi.org/10.1016/
B978-0-08-097086-8.10558-6

Nadiya, E. (2017). STUDI PREFERENSI GENERASI Y DALAM MEMILIH HUNIAN DI JAKARTA
BARAT. Jurnal Muara Ilmu Ekonomi Dan Bisnis, 1(1), 145. https://doi.org/10.24912/
jmieb.v1i1.417

Nguyen, T. T., Hui, P-M., Harper, F. M., Terveen, L., & Konstan, J. A. (2014). Exploring the
filter bubble. 677-686. https://doi.org/10.1145/2566486.2568012

Pariser, E. (2011). Eff Pariser - The Filter Bubble_ What the Internet Is Hiding from You-
Penguin Press HC, The (2011). The Penguin Press.

Prasanti, D., & Indriani, S. S. (2019). Analisis Etnografi Virtual Tentang Proses Komunikasi
Kesehatan Ibu dan Anak dalam Whatsapp Group “Tentang Anak” | Prasanti | Mediator:
Jurnal Komunikasi. Mediator.

Resnick, P., Garrett, R. K., Kriplean, T., Munson, S. A., & Stroud, N. J. (2013). Bursting your
(filter) bubble. 95. https://doi.org/10.1145/2441955.2441981

Sagiyanto, A., & Ardiyanti, N. (2018). SELF DISCLOSURE MELALUI MEDIA SOSIAL INSTAGRAM
(Studi Kasus Pada Anggota Galeri Quote). Nyimak: Journal of Communication, 2(1), 81-
94. https://doi.org/10.31000/nyimak.v2i1.687

 

208 Sri Seti Indriani, Ditha Prasanti, and Rangga Saptya Mohammad Permana
P-ISSN 2580-3808, E-ISSN 2580-3832

 

Shumar, W., & Madison, N. (2013). Ethnography in a virtual world. Ethnography and Educa-
tion, 8(2), 255-272. https://doi.org/10.1080/17457823.2013.792513

Spohr, D. (2017). Fake news and ideological polarization: Filter bubbles and selective expo-
sure on social media. Business Information Review, 34(3), 150-160. https://doi.org/
10.1177/0266382117722446

WALTHER, J. B. (1996). Computer-Mediated Communication. Communication Research, 23(1),
3-43. https://doi.org/10.1177/009365096023001001

Yu, B. (2011). Computer-mediated communication systems. TripleC, 9(2), 531-534. https://
doi.org/10.31269/vol9iss2pp531-534

Zakaria, T., Furqon, S., & Busro, B. (2018). (25) (PDF) Filter bubble effect and religiosity: filter
bubble effect implication in the formation of subjects and views of religiosity. |OP Pub-
lishing Ltd.

Copyright (c) 2020 Nyimak: Journal of Communication

This work is licensed under aCreative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0

 

Analysis of The Filter Bubble Phenomenon in The Use of Online Media 209
for Millennial Generation (An Ethnography Virtual Study
about The Filter Bubble Phenomenon)
