Session: Data Navigation

CHI 2013: Changing Perspectives, Paris, France

Beyond the Filter Bubble: Interactive Effects of Perceived
Threat and Topic Involvement on Selective Exposure to
Information

Q. Vera Liao & Wai-Tat Fu
Department of Computer Science
University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
201 N. Goodwin Avenue, Urbana IL, 61801
liao28, wfu@illinois.edu

ABSTRACT

We investigated participants’ preferential selection of
information and their attitude moderation in an online
environment. Results showed that even when opposing
views were presented side-to-side, people would. still
preferentially select information that reinforced their
existing attitudes. Preferential selection of information was,
however, influenced by both situational (e.g., perceived
threat) and personal (e.g., topic involvement) factors.
Specifically, perceived threat induced selective exposure to
attitude consistent information for topics that participants
had low involvement. Participants had a higher tendency to
select peer user opinions in topics that they had low than
high involvement, but only when there was no perception of
threat. Overall, participants’ attitudes were moderated after
being exposed to diverse views, although high topic
involvement led to higher resistance to such moderation.
Perceived threat also weakened attitude moderation,
especially for low involvement topics. Results have
important implication to the potential effects of
“information bubble” — selective exposure can be induced
by situational and personal factors even when competing
views are presented side-by-side.

Author Keywords
Information Seeking, Filter bubble; Attitude Change;
Perceived Threat; Topic Involvement, Peer Opinions.

ACM Classification Keywords
H.5.m. Information interfaces and presentation (e.g., HCI):
Miscellaneous.

General Terms
Human Factors.

INTRODUCTION

Internet has provided a rich and diverse information
environment to modern societies. It has, however, also
conveniently encouraged selective exposure to information
— defined as a tendency to be exposed to information that

Permission to make digital or hard copies of all or part of this work for
personal or classroom use is granted without fee provided that copies are
not made or distributed for profit or commercial advantage and that copies
bear this notice and the full citation on the first page. To copy otherwise,
or republish, to post on servers or to redistribute to lists, requires prior
specific permission and/or a fee.

CHI 2013, April 27—-May 2, 2013, Paris, France.

Copyright © 2013 ACM 978-1-4503-1899-0/13/04...815.00.

supports one’s own beliefs or attitudes [8]. The selective
exposure phenomenon has made many to believe that the
Internet is leading to increasing social fragmentation and
ideology polarization, as personalized web algorithms that
present information based on interests of individual users
may eventually lead users to find only information that
agrees with their viewpoints and separates them from other
viewpoints. In addition, like-minded people may share their
views within “echo chambers” on the Internet to reinforce
their viewpoints [23]. Premised on this “filter bubble”
concern, new technology (typically in the form of
information aggregator) has been developed to promote
exposure to diverse perspectives in various domains such as
politics [15,18,20], healthcare [13], science [5], and
consumer reviews [26] to avoid the potential negative
effects of the filter bubble [19].

Research has begun to investigate how to design
information systems that optimally present diverse
information to avoid the filter bubble [10, 25]. Information
seekers’ preference for diversity may, however, also be
influenced by situational and personal factors such as
personality, knowledge, information search context, and
personal involvement (see reviews in [2, 6, 8, 11]). Our
goal is to supplement this growing body of research by
systematically investigating the influence of two major
factors — perceived threat and topic involvement — which
arise in a wide range of information search contexts on
information seekers’ selective exposure and attitude
change. To preview our results, we found that even in the
absence of external information filter — i.e., when opposing
views are presented side-by-side to promote consumption
of diverse information (e.g. [13, 15, 18]), selective
exposure to information may still exist.

Situational Factor — Perceived Threat

Information seeking under perceived threat is pervasive. In
everyday life, people are constantly facing the need to
search for wide ranging assortments of opinions for tackling
troubling situations or making critical decision that are
either personal, such as those regarding security, health,
finance, or societal, such as crime, terrorism, economic
crisis. Surprisingly, given the risk of vital loss, people are
often biased in seeking information. For example, it is
commonly observed by physicians that patients are not

2359
Session: Data Navigation

well-motivated to seek balanced information about
treatment or diagnosis methods that they assume will bring
adverse effects [2]. Bankers and investors’ ignorance of
warnings given by other experts was believed to have led to
the financial crisis. Studies on political anxiety showed that,
following major social or political crisis, such as 911 or
Iraq war, anxious citizens could be biased in knowledge
acquisition about such events [7].

From a design perspective, it is important to understand
users’ behavior in an information diverse environment
under threatening circumstances to inform the design of
adaptive, or domain specific information system. For
example, an intelligent news aggregator may be able to
foresee the potential change of information seeking patterns
induced by political or social anxiety in the public
atmosphere; or, by sensing the increased level of anxiety in
the individual, and adapt its selection and presentation of
information to mitigate potential biases in judgment and
decisions. The same applies to various user posting
systems, decision support systems, or search engines when
employed for topics that are sensitive to perception of threat
or anxiety, such as healthcare, politics, finance, etc.

Personal Factor — Topic Involvement

Topic involvement is often studied together with
information seeking and attitude change as a critical
moderator (e.g. [21]). For high involvement topics, users
often have a relatively high motivation to extensively seek
information to learn more about the topic, even for
information that is inconsistent with their existing views.
For low involvement topics, users may be less motivated to
seek information and therefore possibly more selective in
their information consumption.

Another interesting practical question is whether there is
selective exposure to different types of information. The
Internet environment is rich in formal, factual knowledge as
well as “word-of-mouth” knowledge contributed by peer
users, the later of which has become increasingly prevalent
by virtue of “social technologies”. There is substantial
evidence supporting the fact that Internet users seek both
factual knowledge and peer opinions. The question,
however, is in what kind of situation, and for what kind of
users, should the system provides more factual knowledge,
or more peer users opinions that support or challenge users’
existing attitude.

In summary, the current research is centered around the
following research questions:

1. How does perceived threat influence users’ selective
exposure to attitude consistent and inconsistent
information? How does such potential change in
information seeking process impact attitude change?

2. How does topic involvement moderate the impact of
perceived threat on selective exposure, as well as
attitude change?

CHI 2013: Changing Perspectives, Paris, France

3. How do perceived threat and topic involvement
influence users’ preference for factual arguments and
peer opinions that convey competing views?

4. How does selective exposure to diverse information
influence attitude changes?

LITERATURE REVIEW

Most research on selective exposure was conducted within
the framework of cognitive dissonance theory [8]. It asserts
that people experience cognitive dissonance when they
have to consider the negative implications of their selected
choice or pre-existed position. To reduce the unpleasant
psychological state, information seekers are motivated to
expose themselves to attitude consistent information while
avoid or discredit attitude inconsistent information.

Researchers have studied users’ selective consumption of
diverse, and often competing online information [5, 16, 18].
For example, users’ selective exposure to online partisan
news or opinions is a frequently studied topic [9, 10, 17,].
Because of the greater availability and reduced access cost
for diverse information, researchers have found that
although Internet users desire for opinion reinforcing
information, they do not necessarily show aversion to
opposing opinions [9].

When studying selective exposure, CHI researchers have
focused on improving system design to better present
diverse information. Frequently they ask questions such as
“what is the optimal diversity level and optimal
presentation for agreeable and disagreeable items” [5, 17,
18]. Results suggest that there is seldom a universally
correct answer to such question, but design decisions often
depend on various factors. For example, [17] found that
when browsing political news online, some users appear to
be diverse-seeking while others are challenge-averse. It
appears that the lack of a relatively complete understanding
of the underlying factors that influence selective exposure
has created obstacles for developing better intelligent and
reliable personalization technologies [10].

Recent studies showed that an increase in relevant
dimensions of individual’s topic involvement such as
topical importance, interests, certainty and confidence could
promote information seekers’ exposure to attitude
challenging information [1, 8, 11]. To some extent, the
result suggests that, as people become more interested and
knowledgeable about a topic, they may as well become
more motivated to learn from different opinions to form a
better representation of the reality. It is worth pointing out,
however, that it does not necessarily mean they are more
subject to the persuasive influence of competing views. To
the contrary, they may scrutinize the information more
deliberatively, thus their attitudes were moderated only
when they perceived strong arguments [21, 22].

Meanwhile, people who are less involved in the topic tend
to put more weight on factors that are peripheral to the
information (e.g., other people’s agreement, information

2360
Session: Data Navigation

source, etc) [21], therefore may differ from those highly
involved in their preference for factual arguments and peer
opinions when seeking for diverse information. As an
example, in [16], a study on patients using social media to
learn alternative disease models showed that when
evaluating alternative views, patients who committed to a
prior existing model put more weight on factual information
while patients started with no clear model tended to rely on
other patients’ agreement.

Selective exposure is also highly dependent on the social
context. Among others, perceived threat, or anxiety it
brings, has raised increasing attention recently (see review
in [6]). This body of research shows mixed evidence for
whether threat reduces or increases selective exposure.
Some argued that threatening perspective encourages users
to be more vigilant in information seeking, thus carry out
more cognitive effort to process unbiased information [24].
In contrast, from a motivational perspective, some argue
that the cognitive dissonance theory predicts the increased
levels of selective exposure because users have to cope with
the increased level of cognitive discomfort and dissonance
incurred by threat. These mixed results motivated
researchers to attempt to disclose the underlying factors that
moderate the effects of threat [6].

METHODOLOGY

Participants

We recruited 28 participants from the Illinois Champaign-
Urbana community. They mainly consisted of a mix of
college students, faculties and university staff. According to
[4], younger people with higher education are most likely to
seek political news and participate in political activities
online. Although it is possible that people with different
social, cultural, and educational backgrounds may exhibit
different information seeking behavior, we believe our
sample is at least representative of a most active subset of
the online user population who are concerned with seeking
information about controversial social-political issues.

Participants were randomly assigned to the conditions with
(group 2) and without (group 1) the threat manipulation.
The demographical information questionnaire showed there
is no significant difference (p>0.10) in age (M1=26.30,
M2=28.78), gender (64.3% in group 1 and 57.1% in group
2 are female) education level (35.7% in group 1 and 42.9%
in group 2 are graduate students or have graduate degree),
Internet use frequency (M1=1.72, M2=1.53, for scale from
1-less than an hour per day to 5-more than 8 hours per day),
political leaning (M1=3.4, M2=3.1, scale from 1-
conservative to 5-liberal), and self-reported knowledge
about the topics between the two groups.

Materials and Measurements

We first selected 13 candidate topics that are commonly
deemed as controversial. To ensure a reasonably balanced
distribution of topic involvement level among participants,
we selected topics from various domains (e.g., ethics,

2361

CHI 2013: Changing Perspectives, Paris, France

healthcare, crime, sports) ranging from common focus of
public debate (e.g., death penalty) to topics that are less
prevalently discussed (e.g., using steroids for sports). We
measured participants’ attitude on each topic by using a 5-
item semantic differential scale, which is often used to
derive attitude towards given concept by measuring its
connotative meanings [12]. For example, when measuring
participants’ attitude on the issue of vegetarianism, instead
of directly asking whether they held a positive or negative
attitude, we asked them to choose their position on a 7-
point Likert scale for five pairs of bipolar adjectives:
unfavorable-favorable, bad-good, unnecessary-necessary,
harmful-beneficial, unhealthy-healthy. We calculated the
mean rating of the five items to be the subject’s prior
attitude on the topic. The Cronbach’s alpha reaches 0.87,
which is close to excellent internal consistency [3] in
measuring the pre-existing attitudes toward each topic.

Topic involvement is generally considered a multi-
dimensional construct concerned with the topic importance
and relevance to an individual. Following [14], we started
by measuring two types of topic involvement: 1) value-
relevant involvement, which measures the extent to which
the attitudinal topic is linked to important value. We
measured value-relevant involvement by asking participant
a) how much this topic is related to his/her core value, and
b) how important it is to him/her to defend his/her point of
view on this issue, both of which based on a 1 (little) to 7(a
lot) scale; 2) outcome-relevant involvement, which
measures the extent to which one is motivated to process
relevant information to correctly understand the topic. We
measured outcome-relevant involvement by asking
participants a) how interested he/she is in learning about the
topic, and b) how much he/she desires to know the truth
about the topic. It turned out the results of two types of
involvement measures are highly correlated (r=0.84), which
echoed the conclusion of previous studies on topic
involvement [22]. To simplify the analysis, we combined
the two measures by averaging the ratings of the four
questions above and created the topic involvement index.
The Cronbach’s alpha of the four items reaches 0.93, which
is considered excellent internal consistency in measuring
the same latent variable of topic involvement.

After measuring participants’ attitude and topic
involvement for each candidate topic, we excluded those
topics that were highly imbalanced in the pre-existing
attitudes and topic involvement scales. Specifically, we
excluded the topics in which the number of people on one
side of the attitude or topic involvement scale (higher/lower
than neutral) were more than two times the number of
people on the other side. This was done to ensure that for
each topic there were a balanced number of participants
having high or low pre-existing attitudes or involvement in
our samples. This left us with 8 topics used in the
experiment. Examples include “should euthanasia be
legal?” and “should people become vegetarian?” The
complete topic list can be found at the appendix.
Session: Data Navigation

We selected items of arguments and user opinions on each
topic from this website http://procon.org. It is developed by
a non-profit organization that aims at providing resources
for critical thinking for various controversial topics. For
each topic the website provides pros and cons arguments by
summarizing factual information from multiple formal
sources including academic publication, newspaper,
government document, ete. For example, a pro argument
for video game leading to increasing youth violence is:

“Violent video games desensitize players to real-life violence. It is
common for victims in video games to disappear off screen when
they are killed or for players to have multiple lives. In a 2005
study, violent video game exposure has been linked to reduced
P300 amplitudes in the brain, which is associated with
desensitization to violence and increases in aggressive behavior.”

The website also allows users to submit their own opinions.
An example of pro user opinions for the same topic is:

“Violence influences the mind, brain, and the way we act on what
we would've just seen. Those thoughts would still be in our mind
even after an hour or so because our mind is still re-playing what
we saw on screen. This would then reflect on our actions and how
we think for 30-45 minutes. Even I have experienced this.”

We randomly selected 8 pros and 8 cons arguments, as well
as 5 pros and 5 cons user opinions for each topic. We
slightly modified the material to ensure there is no
significant difference in length (about 60-90 words) or rigor
of arguments between items of each side.

To manipulate perceived relevant threat, we followed the
approach used by [6] in their series of studies on threat and
selective exposure. During the experiment, participants
assigned to the condition with threat were exposed to an
image conveying strongly threat-inducing outcomes
relevant to the topic. To avoid biasing the choice and
comprehension of information, we chose pictures
highlighting the negative outcomes related to the topic
while remaining neutral in terms of the discussion. For
example, for the question “does violent video games
contribute to increases of youth violence”, a picture
depicting a badly injured teenager was presented, which
highlighted the threat-inducing aspect of youth violence
without suggesting whether violent video game is a cause.

After showing the picture, we asked the participants to
imagine how they felt if they themselves, or their beloved
ones were involved in such a threatening situation. For
example, participants were asked “how much does it make
you feel suffering if seeing the scene of youth violence”,
and “how much will you be worried if your beloved ones
are involved in violence scene?” based on a | (little) to 5 (a
lot) scale. Following [6], the questions were designed to
strengthen the manipulation of perceived threat.

Procedure

As described earlier, participants were first asked to
complete a survey to measure their prior attitude for all
candidate topics, as well as demographic information. After

CHI 2013: Changing Perspectives, Paris, France

one week the topics were selected, participants were
contacted to complete the main experiment. The experiment
consisted of eight tasks, each corresponding to one selected
topic. For each task, participants assigned to the threat
condition were firstly presented with the threat inducing
image and questions described in earlier section, while
participants in the control condition would skip this step.
Then they were presented with the topic, e.g., “should
certain performance enhancing drugs be legal?” as the
heading on screen. They were then instructed to imagine
they were writing an essay on the given topic using the
website presenting pros and cons arguments and user
opinions on the topic. They were allowed to freely browse
the website, and afterwards they would be asked to write a
short summary of the essay they planned to write.

The interface is shown in Figure 1. The page presents
arguments on top and user opinions at the bottom.
Arguments and user opinions were placed in different two-
column tables, with all pros arguments or opinions on one
side and cons ones on the other. This two-column format is
similar to the interface adopted by many systems that
present competing viewpoints (e.g., [15,18]), in the purpose
of promoting balanced selection of information and
avoiding selective exposure to one-sided information.

For each topic the participants were shown 8 pros and cons
arguments, and 5 pros and cons user opinions, respectively.
Every user opinion was shown with a pseudo user name.
The order of arguments and user opinions were randomized
in each table. For each argument or opinion, only a snippet
of the first sentence was shown, which we specifically
rewrote to give participants a general idea of the item.
Participant could choose to click on “read more” if he or
she wanted to continue reading. A popup window would
show the complete argument or opinion, where participants
were also asked to rate their agreement with the particular
argument or user opinion based on a 5-point Likert scale.

‘Question: Should certain performance enhancing drugs (euch as ster: Jopted in sports?

   

  

EDs doesnt help

Figure 1. Screenshot of experiment interface: factual
argument (top) and user opinions (bottom)

Participants were told to freely read any numbers of items
in any order, and there was no time limit for reading them.
The system automatically recorded their clicks on different
items. After they felt confident to write the essay they could
proceed to the next page, where they would be asked to
write down the main points in their essays. In the end of

2362
Session: Data Navigation

each task they were asked to finish a questionnaire to
measure their attitude on the topic again, which was the
same scale used in the pre-experiment survey.

RESULTS

First, we conducted manipulation check on participants’
ratings on how they felt suffered/worried after the threat
inducing scenarios. The ratings (M=4.70, SD=0.60) were
significantly higher (t (111)=29.96, p<0.01) than neutral
(rating=3), confirming the manipulation was successful.

To differentiate topics that participant had low or high
involvement, we performed median splits on the topic
involvement index of the eight topics for each participant.
As a result, each participant had 4 high-involvement and 4
low-involvement topics. The mean value of the medians for
all participants was 3.75 (SD=0.60), and there was no
outlier (more than +/- 3 SD of the mean). Therefore the
distribution of topic involvement across participants was
well distributed in our samples.

We also recoded participants’ prior attitude as positive or
negative according to whether the mean score of the five
semantic differential items was more or less than neutral
(rating=4), which was also the median of the overall
attitude ratings from all participants. For the 6 out of 224
cases participants gave rating 4 we randomly assigned them
to either side. There was no significant difference of the
proportion of tasks for which participants had positive prior
attitude between the two experiment (threat and no-threat)
groups (¢*(1,224)=0.18, p=0.89). Prior attitudes between
the two groups therefore did not significantly differ.

In this study, our focus was not on features of information
seekers’ prior attitude, therefore we did not control for
magnitude of prior attitude bias but conducted random
sampling, which resulted in reasonably uniformly
distributed prior attitudes in our samples. On the other
hand, since we did not intend to infer the general attitude
distribution in the population, we believe the current sample
size was sufficient for our research questions. To exclude
the influence of attitude related factor on interpreting the
potential effect of topic involvement, we examined in our
sample whether there was correlation between topic
involvement index and attitude extremity, defined as the
absolute deviation of prior attitude rating from neutral
(rating=4), and found no significant correlation(r=-0.06).

On average, participants checked 8.28 items (SD=4.93), in
which they clicked on average 6.12 (SD=3.64) arguments
and 2.16 (SD=2.16) opinions, and they spent M=33.98
(SD=30.39) seconds reading each item. There was no
significant difference between the groups with and without
threat in all the four measures described above (p>0.10),
suggesting that the general participation level was about the
same between the two groups.

Information Selection
To examine participants’ exposure to attitude consistent and
inconsistent information, we created an index: selectivity

CHI 2013: Changing Perspectives, Paris, France

count, by calculating the difference of the number of
attitude-consistent and attitude-inconsistent items clicked
for each topic. Here whether an item is attitude consistent
or not was decided by whether the attitude conveyed by the
message was consistent with the coded prior attitude index
(positive/negative) as described above. E.g., if a participant
held a positive prior attitude towards the topic, then a pro
argument or user opinion was considered attitude consistent
while a con argument or user opinion was considered
attitude inconsistent. The selectivity count was calculated to
capture the tendency of selective exposure, such that a
higher magnitude of the index indicated a stronger bias to
select more attitude-consistent (or attitude-inconsistent)
than attitude-inconsistent (or _ attitude-consistent)
information if the index was positive (or negative).

We first performed an ANOVA on selectivity count with
prior attitudes extremity (rating <3 or >5 as high, others
low) as independent variable, but the effect was not
significant. Given the lack of effect on selectivity count (as
well as other variables we examined in later sections) and
the fact that the current focus was not on effects of prior
attitudes, we did not analyze the effects of prior attitudes in
the rest of the analysis. However, we will discuss our
results in relation to prior attitudes in the discussion section.

We performed a two-way repeated measure ANOVA on
selectivity count with condition (without/with threat) as
between-subjects variable and involvement (low/high) as
within-subjects variable. The result showed that the main
effect of threat was significant (F(1,26)-9.61, p<0.01,
7°=0.27), and the two-way interaction between condition
and involvement was significant (F(1,26)=4.91, p=0.04,
7°=0.16). Figure 2 plotted the mean value of selectivity
count for topics with high and low involvement separately.
The figure shows that this interaction was caused by the
very different effects of threat to participants with low and
high involvement with the topics: When relevant threat was
presented to low-involvement participants, they became
more selective by reading significantly more attitude-
consistent than inconsistent information (F(1,26)=10.46,
p<0.01, n 7=0.29). In contrast, threat had little effect on
high-involvement participants as they behaved consistently
by seeking balanced information with or without threat (
F(1,26)=0.02,p=0.90, 1°<0.01).

1

0 -—_—_—_———_

without threat with threat

Selectivity Count

low involvement

1 high involvement

Figure 2. Mean selectivity count for topics one had low/high
involvement with absence/presence of threat

2363
Session: Data Navigation

In addition, we performed one sample t-tests to compare
each participant’ average selectivity count to zero (balanced
in selecting both sides) with each of the four combinations
of with/without threat and high/low topic involvement. The
result showed that none of them were significantly different
from zero, except when participants were presented with
threat in low involvement topics, the selectivity count was
significantly higher than 0 (t (13)=2.57, p=0.02). The above
results showed that when participants were presented with
contextually relevant threat, they exhibited pronounced
selective exposure for attitude-consistent information, but
only in topics that they had low involvement.

In summary, by comparing participants’ selection of
attitude consistent and attitude inconsistent information, we
found that the presence of contextually relevant threat
induced selective exposure for topics that participants had
low involvement, but there was no effect for topics that
they had high involvement. While previous research
(e.g.,[6]) found that contextually relevant threat increases
information seekers’ tendency of being preferentially
exposed to attitude consistent information, our results
suggested that there is an additional underlying factor: topic
involvement, to moderate this tendency. When seeking
information for topics that one has high involvement, users
seem to be able to maintain balanced information search
even when facing relevant threats. In other words, contrary
to common beliefs, not all users exhibit selective exposure
to information and lead to the “echo chamber” effect. Our
results suggest that the combination of threat and low
involvement will more likely induce selecting exposure to
attitude-consistent information.

Information judgment

Users’ attitude change, after being exposed to information
diverse environment, is likely not only influenced by their
selection of information but also their self-evaluated
agreement with the information they read. To analyze
participants’ self-evaluated agreement with attitude
consistent and attitude inconsistent information, we created
another variable: selective rating, by calculating the
difference between the average rating given to attitude
consistent and that of attitude inconsistent items for each
topic. A positive selective rating indicated that attitude
consistent information was evaluated more favorably, and a
higher magnitude would indicate that this preference was
stronger.

We performed a two-way repeated measure ANOVA on
selective rating with condition (with/without threat) as
between-subjects variable and involvement (high/low) as
within-subjects variable. We found that the main effect of
topic involvement was significant (F(1,28)=4.24 p=0.05,
1°=0.14). No effect of condition or interaction between the
two was observed. As illustrated in Figure 3, it suggested
that participants’ high involvement with the topic was a
reliable predictor of how much they evaluated attitude
consistent information more preferentially than attitude

CHI 2013: Changing Perspectives, Paris, France

inconsistent one, regardless of the presence of contextual
threat. The result echoed conclusion of previous studies
suggesting that high topic involvement promotes the
tendency of critically scrutinizing the attitude inconsistent

information [21, 22].

without threat

with threat

Selective Rating

low involvement

high involvement

Figure 3. Mean selective ratings for high/low involvement
topics in conditions with and without perceived threat

Attitude change

In this study, we are interested in whether being exposed to
diverse views in the online environment could prevent
attitude polarization. Therefore, when examining attitude
change, we conceptually distinguished situations where
attitude was moderated, i.e, moved to the opposite
direction of one’s prior attitude, and attitude became more
extreme, i.e., moved further along the same direction of
prior attitude. Given the prior and post attitude
measurement we used was based on a | (negative) to 7
(positive) scale, we created a variable, attitude moderation
by: 1) if the participant held a positive prior attitude,
attitude moderation was calculated by prior attitude index
minus post attitude index; 2) if the participant held a
negative prior attitude, attitude moderation was calculated
by the post attitude index minus prior attitude index. Hence
a positive attitude moderation value would indicate that the
participant’s attitude was moderated, while a negative value
would indicate that it became more extreme, and the
magnitude of the index indicates the extent of attitude
change to either direction. In our experiment both for topics
with high (t(29)=7.15., p<0.01) and low involvement
(t(29)=7.89, p<0.01), participants’ average attitude
moderation were significantly higher than zero (no change),
suggesting that for both types of topics individual’s
attitudes were moderated after being exposed to a system
presenting diverse information.

We first performed a two-way repeated measure ANOVA
on attitude moderation with condition (with/without threat)
as between-subjects variable and topic involvement as
within-subjects variable. We found that the main effect of
involvement was significant (F(1,26)=12.82, p<0.01,
1°=0.27), and the main effect of presence of threat was
marginally significant (F(1,26)=3.09, p=0.09, y°=0.11). It
suggested that, as shown in Figure 4, in general
participants’ attitudes were less moderated for topics they
had high than low involvement, while the presence of threat
also led to slightly less moderation of attitude.

2364
Session: Data Navigation

Attitude Moderation

without threat with threat

low involvement

high involvement

Figure 4. Mean attitude moderation score for topics one had
high/low involvement with and without threat

In addition to attitude moderation, we also examined the
number of topics in which participants’ attitude flipped
(i.e., shifted to the other side over the neutral point). The
findings were generally consistent with the results of
analysis on attitude moderation: the main effect of topic
involvement was significant (F(1,26)=28.26, p<0.01,
1°=0.52), and the main effect of threat was marginally
significant (F(1,26)= 3.44, p=0.08, 7?=0.12). We also found
the two-way interaction between threat and topic
involvement was marginally significant (F(1,26)=3.14,
p=0.09, 17=0.11), suggesting that the presence of threat had
higher impact on reducing the tendency of attitude flip for
topics participants had low than high involvement.

In summary, both the presence of threat and topic
involvement influenced how attitude changed after being
exposed to the information diverse environment. In general,
all participants’ attitudes were moderated, although they
were less subject to change if they had high than low
involvement with the topic. The current results can be
combined with the results on selective ratings, in which
participants who had high topic involvement agreed with
attitude-consistent information significantly more than
attitude inconsistent information (see Figure 3), and thus
were less moderated by the persuasive effects of attitude-
inconsistent information. Meanwhile, the presented threat
also made participants less likely to change attitude,
especially for topics that they had low involvement. We
could understand this finding by combining the results to
those in the analysis of information selectivity presented
earlier (see Figure 2): when seeking information under
perceived thread for low involvement topics, participants
became significantly more selective in processing attitude-
consistent information over inconsistent n. Therefore,
overall they were exposed to less attitude inconsistent
information that could moderate their attitude in the
presence of perceived threat.

Selection of User Opinions versus Factual Arguments

When facing competing views, people may seek factual
argument, as well as peer opinions to solicit different views.
From a design perspective, it is important to understand
users’ preferential selection of these two types of
information under different situational and individual
factors. To this end, we examined the overall preferential
seeking of peer opinions versus factual arguments, as well

CHI 2013: Changing Perspectives, Paris, France

as participants’ selective exposure to these two types of
information that conveyed competing views.

First, we calculated the percentage of user opinions selected
as compared to the total number of selected items for each
topic. We performed a two-way repeated measure ANOVA
on this percentage value by using condition (with/without
threat) as between-subjects variable and topic involvement
(high/low) as within-subjects variable. Interestingly, we
found a significant two-way interaction between condition
and topic involvement (F(1,28)=6.07, p=0.02, 7?=0.17). We
illustrated this interaction in Figure 5: participants checked
on more user opinions for low than high involvement topics
without perceived threat (F(1,13)=16.4, p=0.01, 7°=0.56).
This difference, however, disappeared when they perceived
threat (F(1,13)=0.02, p=0.90, 7’<0.01).

User Opinions
4

Percentage of Selecting
K

with threat
low involvement

without threat

high involvement

Figure 5. Mean percentages of the selection of user opinions
for high/low involvement topics in with and without threat

To further understand participants’ differential preference
for user opinions that convey competing views, we divided
user opinions into attitude consistent and inconsistent to
analyze if there was selective exposure between them. We
calculated the same selectivity count index by including
only selection of user opinions (i.¢e.,the difference between
the frequencies of selection of attitude consistent and
inconsistent user opinions). We performed the same two-
way repeated ANOVA on user opinions selectivity count
with condition and perceived threat. We found that the two-
way interaction between topic involvement and presence of
threat was marginally significant (F(1,28)=3.31, p=0.08,
7’=0.11). Figure 6 showed that it was caused by the
differential effects of perceived threat on inducing the
tendency of preferentially selecting more attitude consistent
user opinions under threat for low involvement topics
(F(1,13)=3.76, p=0.06,y °=0.13), but not for high
involvement ones (F(1,13)=0.32, p=0.58, 7’=0.01).

without threat with threat

low involvement

Selectivity Count of User
Opinions

high involvement

Figure 6. Mean user opinions selectivity count for high/low
involvement topics in conditions with and without threat

2365
Session: Data Navigation

We then analyzed the selective exposure for only factual
arguments. We calculated the selectivity count among
factual arguments in the same manner as for user opinion
and conducted the same two-way repeated measure
ANOVA. It showed the main effect of threat was
significant (F(1,26)=5.04, p=0.03, 1 °=0.16) and the two-
way interaction between threat and topic involvement was
marginally significant (F(1,28)=3.15, p=0.08, 7 7=0.11).
Figure 7 illustrated that this interaction was again caused by
the differential effect of threat on low and high involvement
topics: perceived threat induced selective exposure towards
attitude consistent factual arguments for low involvement
topics (F(1,28)=7.31, p=0.01, y 7=0.22), but not for high
involvement topics (F(1,28)<0.01, p=0.95, 7<0.01).

without threat with threat

Selectivity Count of
Factual Arguments

low involvement

high involvement

Figure 7. Mean factual argument selectivity count for topics
one had high/low involvement with absence/presence of threat

In summary, the analysis on the selection of user opinions
and factual argument shows that for low involvement
topics, there was a higher tendency to check on user
opinions, however this tendency decreased with
contextually relevant threat. This change could possibly be
explained by the fact that when threat was perceived people
became more vigilant in the information seeking process
[24], and thus might treat the issue as more “serious”. As a
result, they put more weight on factual arguments than user
opinions as they did for topics they had high involvement.
Our analysis on selective exposure revealed that
contextually relevant threat induced higher selective
exposure to both factual arguments and user opinions,
which implied that participants preferentially selected both
attitude consistent factual arguments and attitude consistent
peer opinions to cope with cognitive dissonance.

In general, we found that participants’ information selection
was more sensitive to the influence of contextual factor
when they had low involvement with the topic. In
comparison, for topics users have high involvement,
balanced and consistent information seeking strategy for
attitude consistent and inconsistent information was
adopted across different situational context and for different
types of information, with a higher general preference for
factual information. It was consistent with conclusions from
previous research, which stated that increased level of topic
involvement often leads to an “open minded” information
seeking strategy towards competing views and a lower
reliance on other people’s opinions [1, 8].

CHI 2013: Changing Perspectives, Paris, France

DISCUSSION

Our study showed that, even when opposing views were
presented side-by-side, information seeking under
perceived relevant threat led to more pronounced selective
exposure to attitude consistent information. This increased
level of selective exposure also leads to less attitude change
due to the overall less reception of attitude challenging
information. However, high topic involvement can override
this tendency such that people seek relatively balanced
exposure to attitude consistent and inconsistent information.
Nonetheless, high involvement with the topic results in
more preferential evaluation of attitude consistent
information over attitude inconsistent one, and largely
increases the resistance to attitude change.

According to Frey [7], when facing cognitive dissonance
brought by  attitude-challenging information, — the
consistency of the cognitive system is maintained by either
avoiding attitude-inconsistent information, or by counter
arguing attitude-inconsistent information in order to find
flaws in it. For topics that people have low involvement, in
which people may have less knowledge and thus fewer
defending arguments available, they may feel higher level
of uncertainty and less motivated to counter-argue attitude-
challenging information. While they may be interested in
discovering attitude-challenging information otherwise,
perceived threat may increase the motivation to avert
themselves from confronting attitude challenging
information. From a motivational account, it is also possible
that for topics that people have high involvement, they have
a higher motivation to learn about the truth about the topic
regardless of their own position. According to [1,24], this
kind of accuracy motive is able to mitigate the tendency of
selective exposure. As a result, people may be able to retain
higher level of accuracy motive for topics that they have
high involvement regardless of the situation.

These findings suggest that selective exposure is sensitive
to situational variables if they are less involved with the
topic. For example, a newly diagnosed patient, who is likely
to feel increasing level of anxiety, may have a higher
tendency to expose himself to information about a treatment
he or she prefers and fails to pay attention to different
perspectives to better inform the medical decision. In this
kind of situation, the system (e.g., search engine,
recommendation system) should provide adequate
information about their preferred choice while encourage
the exposure to high quality information about the
alternatives [10]. On the other hand, the system should
provide a balanced mix of alternative or competing views if
it recognizes that the user is knowledgeable or frequently
exposed to the domain or topic.

While the study in [17] concluded that system designers
should be aware that there exists both “diverse-seeking”
users and “challenge-averse” users, our findings seem to
complement their finding in suggesting that these
tendencies are not fixed for each individual but are sensitive

2366
Session: Data Navigation

to situational factors and dependent on the domain or topic.
A person who is highly passionate about politics may seek
diverse information when browsing political news.
However, he may become challenge-averse when it comes
to information seeking for a health related decisions.
Although it is a highly challenging task to accurately
predict users’ preference for the level of diversity based on
the complex interactions among personal, topic-related, and
situational factors, our study provides preliminary evidence
that, to design for personalized presentation of diverse
information, it is helpful to take into account users’ overall
involvement with the domain/topic and the situation of the
information seeking process, such as whether it is for acute
information needs (e.g., learning about ongoing events,
making time sensitive decisions), or whether it is about an
anxiety sensitive topic (e.g., politics, finance, health).

By analyzing the selection of factual arguments and user
opinions separately, we found that users may have a higher
tendency to seek peer users’ opinions if they are studying a
topic that they consider less involved. However, if they are
facing a threatening situation, they may turn to factual
arguments more often and increase their tendency of
preferentially seeking both attitude consistent factual
arguments and attitude consistent user opinions. These
findings have interesting implications for designing systems
that aggregate and present diverse information. For
example, the system may provide more peer users’ opinions
as well as competing views for topics that are relatively
casual (e.g., entertainment), but highlight attitude
supporting information and high quality factual arguments
for topics that may potentially induce threat and anxiety.

Our study also suggested, to a certain extent, that
information seekers’ attitude could be moderated by
exposure to diverse viewpoints, even for topics that one
already had a certain level of involvement. In general, it
supported the validity of promoting personal deliberation
and preventing attitude extremity by exposing people to
diverse opinions enabled by technology intervention as
suggested by previous researchers [10, 15, 20]. Our finding
provided further evidence that attitude moderation for low
involvement topics tended to be more effective, suggesting
that the exposure to diverse information may have a larger
impact for low-involvement topics, as such experiences
may encourage knowledge acquisition and attitude
construction for these topics.

During preliminary data analysis, we explored the effects of
attitude extremity by comparing cases where participants
had more extreme prior attitude rating (<3 or >5) to those
who were more neutral. However, we did not find any
significant effect on either information selection or attitude
change (p>0.10). At first glance, it may seem somewhat
counterintuitive, as people with more extreme attitude may
be less likely to change. However, we observed that in our
sample, there were cases where participants who held
extreme attitudes actually shifted their attitude in a

CHI 2013: Changing Perspectives, Paris, France

relatively large magnitude. Interestingly, most of these
cases were regarding topics participants had low
involvement, which again underscored the interactive
effects of pre-existing attitude and personal involvement on
attitude moderation.

Given that our experiment used 8 controversial topics that
covered a wide variety of domains that varied in their
prevalence, it is unlikely that participants would have
mature attitudes in all topics. This could be one reason why
we found the dominating effects of topic involvement,
rather than attitude extremity, on attitude change. In the
experiment, the system provided 13 different aspects on
either side (pro/con), which could serve as an intensive
educating platform that led to discoveries of new
knowledge and (re)construction of attitude. It was possible
that, for topics that one had low involvement, the
processing of the larger amount of information that was
new to the participants resulted in higher attitude change as
they acquire more knowledge about the topics. This
inference was at least partially supported by the fact that
our topic involvement measure had a high correlation with
participants’ self claimed topical knowledge (1-0.77).
Another related finding was the low correlation between
attitude extremity (measured by absolute difference
between prior attitude rating and neutral rating 4) and topic
involvement (1=-0.06), which calls attention to an important
and potentially dangerous phenomenon: people could
express a relatively extreme attitude even when they have
neither adequate knowledge nor motivation to learn about
the topic. The attitude is therefore likely to be an
uninformed or even biased one. An information aggregation
system that presents well-organized high quality
information on multiple facets of the topic can be effective
and efficient for the purpose of educating without bias.
These results imply that information interfaces may need to
adapt to both the levels of knowledge or familiarity of the
topic and personal involvement of the users to encourage a
more balanced processing of multiple viewpoints.

Lastly, we should point out that the interface we used in the
experiment was already an optimized design in presenting
diverse information. Presenting equal numbers of pros and
cons items in a well-defined layout was often considered an
effective means to encourage users to check on both sides
of the issues [18]. Although in the experiment, selective
exposure was salient only in the condition of low topic
involvement with threat, selective exposure may be even
more pronounced in a loosely organized online information
environment, in which users follow hyperlinks, or use
simple interfaces commonly designed for many information
retrieval or aggregation systems for everyday information
needs. Our results provided strong support that information
bubble can emerge from the interactions of multiple factors
in addition to that created by personalization Web
algorithms. How technology interacts with multiple
personal and social factors to impact effectiveness of
balanced civic discourse through the online information

2367
Session: Data Navigation

environment clearly demands more research and attention
from both information engineers and HCI researchers.

ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
We thank Arpit Agarwal for programming the interface.

REFERENCES

1. Albarracin, D., & Mitchell, A. L. The role of defensive
confidence in preference for proattitudinal information:
How believing that one is strong can sometimes be a
defensive weakness. Personality and Social Psychology
Bulletin 30 (2004), 1565-1584.

. Case, D.O., Andrews, J, Johnson, J, Allard, S. Avoiding
versus Seeking: the Relationship of Information Seeking
to Avoidance, Blunting, Coping, Dissonance, and
Related Concepts. Journal of Medical Library
Association 93, 3 (2005), 353-362

. Cronbach, L.J., Coefficient Alpha and The Internal
Structure of Tests. Psychometrika 16, 3 (1951), 297-
334.

. Dutta-Bergman, M.J. Complementarity in Consumption
of News Types Across Traditional and New Media.
Journal of Broadcasting & Electronic Media 48, 1
(2010), 41-60

. Faridani, S., Bitton, E., Ryokai, K., Goldberg, K.
Opinion Space: A Scalable Tool for Browsing Online
Opinions. In Proc. CHI2010 1175-1184.

. Fischer P., Kastenmuller, A., Greitemeyer, T., Fischer
J., Frey, D. Threat and Selective Exposure: The
Moderating Role of Threat and Decision Context on
Confirmatory Information Search After Decision.
Journal of Experimental P sychology: General 140, 1
(2011). 51-62.

. Fischer, P., & Ai, A. International terrorism and mental
health: Recent research and future directions. Journal of
Interpersonal Violence 23(2008), 339-361.

. Frey, D. Recent Research on Selective Exposure to
Information. Advances in Experimental Social
Psychology 19(1986), 41-80.

. Garrett, R. K. Echo chambers online?: Politically
motivated selective exposure among Internet news

users,” Journal of Computer Mediated Communication
14, 2(2009), 265-285.

10. Garrett, R., Resnick, P. Resisting Political
Fragmentation on the Internet. Daedalus 140, 4 (2011)
108-120.

11.Hart, W., Albarracin, D., Eagly, A., Brechan, I.,
Lindberg, M., Feeling Validated Versus Being Correct:
A Meta-Analysis of Selective Exposure to Information.
Psychological Bulletin 135, 4 (2009), 555-588.

12.Himmelfarb, S. The measurement of attitudes. In A.H.
Eagly & S. Chaiken (Eds.), Psychology of Attitudes
(1993), 23-88. Thomson/Wadsworth

2368

CHI 2013: Changing Perspectives, Paris, France

13. Jiang, Y., Liao, Q., Cheng, Q., Berlin, R., Schatz, B.
Designing and Evaluating a Clustering System for
Organizing and Integrating Patient Drug Outcomes in
Personal Health Messages. In Proc. AMIA 2012

14. Johnson, B. J. & Eagly, A. Effects of Involvement on
Persuasion: A Meta-Analysis. Psychological Bulletin,
106, 2(1989), 290-314.

15.Kriplean, T., Morgan, J., Freelon, D., Borning, A.,
Bennett, L. Supporting Reflective Public Thouht with
Considerlt. In Proc. CSCW 2012, 265-274.

16.Mankoff, J., Kuksenok, K, Rode, J., Kiesler, S.,
Waldman, K. Competing Online Viewpoints and
Models of Chronic Illness. Jn Proc. CHI2011, 589-597.

17.Munson, S. & Resnick P. Presenting Diverse Political
Opinions: How and How Much. In Proc. CH12010,
1457-1466.

18.Oh, A., Lee, H., Kim, Y. User Evaluation of a System
for Classifying and Displaying Political Viewpoints of
Weblogs. In Proc. JCWSM 2009, 282-285

19. Pariser, Eli. The Filter Bubble: What the Internet Is
Hiding from You, Penguin Press, 2011

20.Park, S., Kang, S., Chung, S., Song, J. NewsCube:
Delivering Multiple Aspects of News to Mitigate Media
Bias. Jn Proc. CHI2009, 443-452

21.Petty, R-E., & Cacioppo, J. Communication and
Persuasion: Central and Peripheral Routes to Attitude
Change. New York: Springer-Verlag, 1986.

22.Petty, R-E.& Cacioppo J. Involvement and Persuasion:
Tradition Versus Integration. Psychological Bulletin
107,3 (1990), 367-374.

23.Sunstein, C. R. Republic.com. Princeton, NJ: Princeton
University Press, 2002.

24. Valentino, N. A., Banks, A., Hutchings, V., Davis, A.
Selective Exposure in the Internet Age: The Interaction
between Anxiety and Information Utility. Political
Psychology 30, 4 (2006) 591-613.

25. Vydiswaran, V., Zhai, C., Roth, D., Pirolli, P. Unbiased
Learning of Controversial Topics. Jn Proc. ASIST2012

26. Yatani, K., Novati M., Trusty, A., Truong, K. Review
Spotlight: A User Interface for Summarizing User
Generated Reviews Using Adjective-Noun Word Pairs.
In Proc. CHI2011, 1541-1550

APPENDIX: TOPICS USED IN THE EXPERIMENT

1. Should certain performance enhancing drugs (such as steroids) be
accepted for sports?

. Should death penalty be allowed?

Should prescription drugs be advertised directly to consumers?

. Should euthanasia be legal?

. Do violent video games contribute to the increase of youth violence?

. Should people become vegetarian?

. Should the US have sent troops to Iraq?

. Should social security be privatized?

SIDA RWH
