Running Head: BURSTING THE FILTER BUBBLE

Bursting the filter bubble: The mediating effect of discussion frequency on network

heterogeneity
BURSTING THE FILTER BUBBLE 2

Structured Abstract

Purpose: The purpose of this study is to identify the structural processes that lead
citizens to escape their common social circles when talking about politics and public affairs
(e.g., ‘filter bubbles'). To do so, this study tests to what extent political attitudes, political
behavior, news media consumption and discussion frequency affect discussion network
heterogeneity among U.S. citizens.

Methodology/approach: Supported by the polling group Nielsen, this study uses a
two-wave panel online survey to study the antecedents and mechanisms of discussion network
heterogeneity among U.S. citizens. To test the hypotheses and answer the research questions,
OLS regressions (cross-sectional, lagged, autoregressive) and mediation analyses were
conducted.

Findings: The findings imply that political discussion frequency functions as the key
element in explaining the mechanism that leads politically interested and participatory
citizens (online) as well as news consumers of traditional and online media to seek a more
heterogencous discussion network, disrupting the so-called “filter bubbles.’ However,
mediation analyses also showed that discussion frequency can lead to more homogenous
discussion networks if people score high on political knowledge, possibly reflecting the
formation of a close network of political savvy individuals.

Originality/value: The survey data gives important insights into the 2016 pre-election
situation, trying to explain why US citizens were more likely to remain in homogenous
discussion networks when talking about politics and public affairs. By using two-wave panel
data, the analyses allow to draw tentative conclusions about the influential and inhibiting
factors and mechanisms that lead individuals to seek/avoid a more heterogenous discussion
network.

Keywords: network heterogeneity, discussion frequency, political interest, news use,

filter bubble
BURSTING THE FILTER BUBBLE 3

Bursting the filter bubble: The mediating effect of discussion frequency on network
heterogeneity

The US Presidential Election 2016 and the pervasive partisan flow of information
about the presidential candidates online have revived the notion of ‘filter bubbles’ (Pariser,
2011) and ‘information cocoons’ (Sunstein, 2006). Journalists, critics and opinion makers
were quick in identifying the scapegoats of the surprising turnout of the election, blaming
social media for spreading false information (Baer, 2016; El-Bermawy, 2016) and creating an
information environment that has reinforced existing beliefs and strengthened political
polarization (cf., Stroud, 2010; Knobloch-Westerwick and Meng, 2011). What is more,
European politicians and advisors have expressed their concerns about increased personalized
media content and its danger for a healthy democracy (Vike-Freiberga et al., 2013). It is in
this vein that social media and personalized algorithms (e.g., on Twitter, Facebook) have been
suspected of enforcing people’s tendency to solely reside in information environments and
social circles that affirm their personal opinions, attitudes and points of views (cf. Pariser,
2011).

However, not only has recent research casted doubt on the so-called ‘filter bubble’
(Nelson and Webster, 2017; Zuiderveen Borgesius et al., 2016), part of the theoretical rational
is also imperfect: citizens and voters are not active on the Internet or social media 24/7.
Surely, recent figures show that 77% of Americans go online every day and 26% of
Americans are online almost constantly (Perrin and Jiang, 2018). Yet these findings do not
rule out that American citizens also get exposed to views and opinions about politics and
current affairs when interacting with their peers in real-life settings. After all, the majority of
people goes online for leisure and entertaining purposes rather than for political reasons (Park
et al., 2009; Quan-Haase and Young, 2010). And political beliefs, attitudes and voting choices
are still vastly influenced by face-to-face conversations with family members, friends and

neighbors (Berger et al., 2008; Huckfeldt and Sprague, 1995).
BURSTING THE FILTER BUBBLE 4

Thus, the discussion about the prevalence of like-minded information cocoons
(Sunstein, 2006) needs to better incorporate the offline scenery theoretically and empirically.
Furthermore, research needs to better explain why and under what circumstances people are
more likely to encounter opinions and viewpoints that differ from their own—both online and
offline (cf. Choi and Lee, 2015; Lee et al., 2014; Sunstein, 2018). What we know from past
research is that social media and the Internet, just as the offline scenery, offers information
and exchange opportunities for both: people who seek information that reaffirms their existing
beliefs; and people who seck a more diverse and heterogenous information environment
(Festinger, 1957; Knobloch-Westerwick and Meng, 2009; 2011; Sears and Freedman, 1967).

Facing an age with information ubiquity both offline and online, the question therefore
remains: What are the structural processes that lead citizens to escape their common social
circles when talking about politics and public affairs? Using a two-wave panel survey among
U.S. citizens in 2013/2014, we find that political discussion frequency functions as the key
mediator in explaining the mechanism that leads politically interested and participatory
citizens (online) as well as news consumers of traditional and online media to seek a more
heterogencous discussion network. However, discussion frequency can also lead to more
homogenous discussion networks if people score high on political knowledge, possibly
reflecting the formation of a political-savvy elite.

Literature Review
Network Heterogeneity and Democracy

We are currently living in a political environment that is characterized by political
polarizations, extremism, and violent rioting (¢.g., Charlottesville 2017, Gunter and Hughes,
2018). All around the world, but particularly in the U.S., we have witnessed clashes among
society and politics with regards to controversial topics (e.g., climate change, refugee policy,
vaccines). Although political debates and disagreement are necessary and useful aspects of a

well-functioning democracy (Sorensen, 2018; Chadwick et al., 2017), it has been reported that
BURSTING THE FILTER BUBBLE 5

not only political debates have become more hostile, disrespectful and polemic over time
(Sood and Iyengar, 2016), the strong divide between ideological political stances has also
made reconciliations between parties more difficult (Iyengar et al., 2019; Davis and
Dunaway, 2016). Given these recent developments, it becomes of paramount interest to study
the underlying mechanisms that foster a citizenship that is open-minded and willing to listen
to opinions and voices that differ from their own, opening up possibilities for fruitful
compromises that create solutions for a harmonious life together. In fact, it has long been
argued by sociologists, political scientists and communication scholars that being exposed to
a diverse set of viewpoints is the nucleus for deliberative democracies (Habermas, 1989; Price
et al., 2002) and democratic citizenship (e.g., Gil de Zufiiga and Valenzuela, 2011; Mutz,
2006; Sunstein, 2002).

However, recent detrimental societal movements, such as the rise of the political right
around the globe (e.g., Berlet and Lyons, 2018) as well as hate speech and discrimination on
the net (e.g., Gerstenfeld et al., 2003), show that our democratic societies are far away from
enacting deliberative discourses. Moreover, the increasing fragmentation and polarization
within societies pose a real threat for the functioning of democracies. Individuals have
become less likely to identify common ground and understanding with the ‘other group’
(Sunstein, 2001). It is in this vein that human interactions and discussions between individuals
who differ in their ideas, viewpoints as well as ethnical and social backgrounds gain
increasing relevance. Scholars in communication science have identified the discussion
among people with diverse viewpoints and political attitudes as discussion network
heterogeneity (Kwak et al., 2005; Mutz, 2002; Scheufele et al., 2006; Scheufele et al., 2004).
These unfamiliar encounters are believed to increase the identification of shared experiences,
and thereby the likeliness of acceptance and tolerance which work as “social glue” (Sunstein,
2002, p. 9; Mutz and Mondak, 2006; Price et al., 2002) for diverse democratic societies. As

Sunstein (2018) contends, “in a democracy ...lives—including digital ones—should be
BURSTING THE FILTER BUBBLE 6

structured so that people frequently come across views and topics that they have not
specifically selected” (p. 7)
Network Heterogeneity and Endogeneity Problems

However, the vast majority of research on discussion network heterogeneity has
concentrated on the concept as a direct or indirect antecedent for political behavior such as
political participation, political knowledge or civic engagement (e.g., Choi et al., 2017; Kim
and Chen, 2015; McLeod et al., 1999b; Mutz, 2002; Scheufele et al., 2004; 2006). Thus,
rather than providing another study that aims at testing the positive outcomes of political
discussions among a diverse network of people for democracy, we strive for empirical
evidence that informs us about the underlying mechanisms that explain why individuals are
more likely to expose themselves to a heterogeneous discussion network. Reviewing previous
research on network heterogeneity, we have identified various behavioral and attitudinal
variables that can be hypothesized to contribute to individuals’ likeliness to reside in non-like-
minded discussion networks. These include political participation, political efficacy, political
interest, political knowledge, ideology and news use. What is more, we position discussion
Jrequency about politics and public affairs—which has so far been mostly considered as a
control variable—at the center of our analysis, arguing that it works as a conduit between
political attitudes, political behavior, news use and discussion network heterogeneity. See
Figure | for the conceptual model.

[Figure 1 about here]

Political Behavior, Attitudes and Network Heterogeneity

Political Participation. Although the conceptualization of network heterogeneity
differs quite substantially among scholars (Eveland and Hively, 2009), the main focus of
previous research has lied on the role of network heterogeneity for political participation (c.g.,
Choi et al., 2017; Lu et al., 2018). Two camps have emerged in this field of research.

Representative of the first camp posit that individuals embedded in a heterogenous social
BURSTING THE FILTER BUBBLE 7

network are more likely to retreat from political activity due to so-called “cross-cutting
pressures” and the need for harmony with their social relationships (Lazarsfeld et al., 1944;
Mutz, 2002; Nir, 2005). It has been argued that individuals belonging to social groups,
characterized by conflicting interests and opinions, have difficulties in making up their
political mind, resulting in delayed participation or no participation in elections at all.
However, research that has tried to replicate the findings could not find evidence for the
cross-pressure hypothesis, pointing to methodological errors and theoretical misconceptions
(Eveland and Hively, 2009; Horan, 1971; Knoke, 1990).

In fact, more recent work (second camp) suggests that heterogeneous discussion
networks lead to positive effects in terms of political engagement, civic citizenship and
deliberative democracy overall (Cappella et al., 2002; Choi et al., 2017; Kim and Chen, 2015;
Lu et al., 2018; McLeod et al., 1999b; Scheufele et al., 2004; 2006). For example, individuals
who are embedded in a heterogeneous network are not only more knowledgeable in politics
(e.g., Scheufele et al., 2004), they are also reported to be more likely to increase political
tolerance (Mutz and Mondak, 2006; Price et al., 2002) and decrease polarization (e.g., Lee
and Choi, 2020). Furthermore, previous research that has shown that network heterogeneity is
positively related to political participation (McLeod et al., 1999b; Scheufele et al., 2004;
2006), has been confirmed by a current stream of research on online social networks that has
found positive effects of network heterogeneity on political participation (Choi et al., 2017;
Kim and Chen, 2015; Lu et al., 2018), particularly when news use is involved (e.g., Kim,
2018). Despite the plethora of research on the relation between network heterogeneity and
political participation, none of the research cited above has focused on the reversed direction.
Hence, to get more insights into what determines the constitution of heterogeneous networks,
we want to inquire: (RQ1): How does political participation (offline, online, social media)

relate to discussion network heterogeneity?
BURSTING THE FILTER BUBBLE 8

Political Efficacy. Given that political efficacy is an important predecessor for
political participation (Hayes et al., 2006) and voting (Verba and Nie, 1972), it might also
play a crucial role for discussion network heterogeneity. However, as Eveland and Hively
(2009) have pointed out, there is a lack of research that has investigated the potential
influence of political efficacy on diverse networks. Even up to now, research on discussion
network heterogeneity has forgone to include political efficacy in conceptual and analytical
models, or only used it as a control variable (Kim et al., 2013). However, reversely, research
has shown that political efficacy is positively influenced by the frequency of political talk and
the orientation toward common understandings within political conversations (Rojas, 2008).

Hence, citizens who encounter more political talk are more likely to believe they have
a good understanding of politics and feel qualified to participate in politics (cf. internal
efficacy: Niemi et al., 1991). Likewise, citizens might also perceive themselves to be more
politically efficacious if they get regularly exposed to a broad range of political ideas,
arguments and issues that can be considered representative of the electorate. Reversely, it is
also likely that individuals who are exposed to diverse political attitudes become disillusioned
about their own ability to participate in politics and more skeptical with regards to their
perception about their understanding of the political sphere (cf. Eveland and Hively, 2009).
The sheer diversity of viewpoints, argumentations and positions that are difficult to
understand—and maybe even to tolerate for some—might discourage individuals to feel
politically efficacious. Given the scarce body of research on this matter, we pose the
following research question: (RQ2): How is political efficacy related to individuals’
discussion network heterogeneity?

Political Interest. The fact that motivation and interest in politics play crucial roles in
explaining political behavior has long been accepted in the academic community, but
particularly since the publication of Prior’s work on media choice and inequality in political

involvement and elections (2007). Focusing on network heterogeneity, Kwak et al. (2005)
BURSTING THE FILTER BUBBLE 9

have shown that attention paid to discussions is a crucial factor in explaining the positive
relationship between network heterogeneity and political participation. In other words,
individuals who are entrenched in a heterogeneous discussion network, and who are attentive
to what their discussion partners have to contribute to the conversation, are more likely to
become politically engaged. Thus, the extent to which somebody is interested in politics
might also be strongly linked to the extent to which individuals seek diverse discussion
networks.

However, political interest has mostly been ignored (e.g., McLeod et al., 1999b;
Scheufele et al., 2004; 2006) or simply been treated as a control variable in past research
about discussion network heterogeneity (e.g., Kwak et al., 2005). Investigating disagreement
within communication networks, Huckfeldt and Morehouse Mendez (2008) concluded that
political interest, knowledge and the education of individuals are strong predictors for
discussion frequency. A more recent paper by Choi and Lee (2015) has studied the reverse
relationships and provided evidence that political interest moderates the relationship between
news sharing online and network heterogeneity. Thus, we hypothesize (H1): Individuals who
have a strong interest in politics are more likely to be exposed to a heterogeneous discussion
network.

Political Knowledge. Long ago, political interest has already been found to be
strongly linked to political knowledge (Seeman, 1966). Since then, a wide range of research
has highlighted that the more people know about politics, the more likely they are to actively
participate in politics (e.g., Bennett, 1986; McLeod et al., 1999a; Neuman, 1986). At the same
time, it has been argued that this relationship might also be triggered by other intervening
factors, such as the frequency of political discussions or with whom people actually discuss
politics. Scheufele et al. (2006), for example, found evidence that network heterogeneity is

positively related to political participation, but mediated through political knowledge. Hence,
BURSTING THE FILTER BUBBLE 10

how political knowledge contributes to political participation (in various forms) might also
depend on the diversity of political opinions and viewpoints individuals encounter.

In fact, previous research has shown that network heterogeneity enhances political
knowledge (Huckfeldt et al., 2004; McLeod et al., 1999b; Scheufele et al., 2004). More
specifically, it has been argued that individuals exposed to disagreement and opposing views
have to use more cognitive activity to reflect upon new arguments they encounter, and in
order to find (new) ways to defend their position—possibly also revising their own opinion
(Levine and Russo, 1995). More recent studies support this mechanism. Eveland and Hively
(2009), distinguishing between issue stance knowledge and knowledge structure density,
found that both dangerous and diverse discussion networks are positively related with
knowledge structure density.

Hence, when considering the reverse direction, it might also be possible that
individuals with strong political knowledge are more likely to seek various political
viewpoints to maintain their knowledge and get to know to various perspectives towards an
issue. Given the absence of evidence for the reversed relationship between political
knowledge and discussion network heterogeneity, we assume: (H2): The more individuals
know about politics, the more they are exposed to a heterogeneous discussion network.

Political Ideology. A related stream of research investigating information selection in
a diverse information environment has focused on the phenomenon of selective exposure and
how it reinforces or alters political ideologies and attitudes. Grounded in cognitive dissonance
theory (Festinger, 1957) and motivated reasoning (Kraft et al., 2015), scholars argue that
people are likely to avoid media content that is not in line with their own beliefs and tend to
consume information that confirms their already existing opinions and ideologies (Taber and
Lodge, 2006), albeit not necessarily avoiding counter-attitudinal information (Garrett et al.,
2013). Scholars in political science have found evidence that exposure to diverse political

views and ideologies indeed brings about detrimental effects, such as the reinforcement of
BURSTING THE FILTER BUBBLE 11

pre-existing political attitudes and opinions, thus leading to even more extreme positions (c.g.,
on gun control: Taber and Lodge, 2006; same-sex marriage and sexual minority rights:
Wojcieszak and Price, 2010; or attitude toward political candidates: Meffert et al., 2006).

At the same time, empirical findings have also casted doubt on the black/white news
and information consumption behavior (e.g., Nelson and Webster, 2017), pointing to various
underlying factors that influence the extent to which people expose themselves to opposing
views and ideologies. Lee et al. (2014) have shown, for example, that individuals with a more
heterogeneous network on social network services are more polarized in ideology, but only if
they discuss politics with others more often. Similarly, a more recent study suggests that the
effect of heterogeneous discussion networks on opinion polarization might be moderated by
political orientation such that more liberal individuals (i.e. South Koreans) show higher levels
of polarization when being exposed to opposing opinions than individuals with lower liberal
attitudes (Lee and Choi, 2020). To the best of our knowledge, Lee and colleagues (2014) have
provided the only study that has investigated the reversed direction, and they found that
political ideology is positively related to network heterogeneity. Given that previous research
about network heterogeneity has only controlled for political ideology (Brundidge, 2010) or
strength of partisanship respectively (e.g., Kim et al., 2013), we hypothesize based on Lee et
al.’s (2014) findings: (H3): The stronger individuals’ political ideology, the more they are
exposed to a heterogeneous discussion network.

News Use and Network Heterogeneity

Scholars disagree whether being embedded in a heterogeneous discussion network
leads individuals to consume more (hard) news media in order to learn about diverse
viewpoints, political arguments and topics (McLeod et al., 1998; Nisbet et al., 2003), or
whether the consumption of news and the encountering of various positions and issues in the
news lead people to seek a more diverse social network (Brundidge, 2010). It has been argued

based on the uses and gratifications theory that individuals will pay more attention to diverse
BURSTING THE FILTER BUBBLE 12

topics in the news if they also anticipate to interacting with a heterogeneous pool of
individuals with a variety of interests, backgrounds and viewpoints (Eveland, 2004; Scheufele
et al., 2004). McLeod et al. (1999b), for example, concluded that discussions about politics in
heterogeneous networks may enhance reflective thinking about issues. And Scheufele et al.
(2004), indeed, found that individuals who have reported to have a more diverse discussion
network were more likely to use hard news content in newspapers and television—news
formats that demand more cognitive effort when processing information compared to soft
news.

Brundidge (2010) has confirmed the reversed hypothesis, showing that online news
use is positively related with a heterogenous political discussion network, albeit the
relationship was rather small. Looking at news sharing activities but not consumption directly,
Choi and Lee (2015) have shown that news sharing mediates the relationship between social
networking services and network heterogeneity. Similarly, Choi et al. (2017) provided
evidence that news sharing positively moderates the relationship between network
heterogeneity and political participation. However, given that previous research has not
differentiated between traditional, online or social media news use or did not measure active
news consumption per se (cf. Choi and Lee, 2015), the relationship between news use and
network heterogeneity is still unclear. We thus pose the third research question: (RQ3): How
is news use (RO3a: traditional, RO3b: online, RO3c: social media) related to discussion
network heterogeneity?

The Mediating Role of Discussion Frequency

The more citizens talk about politics and public affairs, the more they become
politically informed and the more likely they take responsibility as participatory democratic
citizens (e.g., Scheufele et al., 2004; Wyatt et al., 2000). A wide range of research has shown
that political discussion is a determining factor for political participation in various forms

(e.g., Gastil et al., 2002; McLeod et al., 1999a; Scheufele et al., 2004; Wyatt et al., 2000).
BURSTING THE FILTER BUBBLE 13

Furthermore, more political discussion has been found to enhance understanding for political
topics (e.g., Scheufele et al., 2002) and the integration into a community (Stamm et al., 1997).
In addition, scholars have identified political discussion as a crucial moderator in
strengthening political efficacy when being exposed to political campaigns, either in the
newspapers or on the Internet (Nisbet and Scheufele, 2004).

However, the findings reported above solely focus on the uni-directional effect of
discussion frequency on political behavior, but not on mediation processes that are indicative
for a deliberative democracy, such as the extent to which people discuss politics with a
diverse network of opinions and attitudes. What is more, the seminal studies (Choi et al.,
2017; Kim and Chen, 2015; Kwak et al., 2005; Mutz, 2002; Scheufele et al., 2004) in the field
of discussion network heterogeneity have not consistently considered discussion frequency as
a key variable that affects network heterogeneity. While Choi et al. (2017), Mutz (2002) and
Scheufele et al. (2004; 2006) simply controlled for the variable when predicting political
participation, Kim and Chen (2015) and Kwak et al. (2005) did not even include discussion
frequency in their analyses. Thus, there is a conceptual and empirical lack of research that
investigates the pivotal role that discussion frequency might play with regard to network
heterogeneity. As follows, this study seeks to investigate the mediating effect of discussion
frequency by posing the final research question: (RQ4): To what extent is the relationship
between political behavior, political attitudes, news use and network heterogeneity mediated
by discussion frequency?

Method
Sample and Data

The data for this study are based on a two-wave panel online survey which was
administered in the United States. The distribution of the survey was supported by the media
polling group Nielsen. Nielsen uses a stratified quota-sampling method to recruit respondents

from a pool of over 200,000 pre-registered US citizens to reach a sample that is most likely to
BURSTING THE FILTER BUBBLE 14

resemble the demographic distribution as reported by the US Census. Wave 1 of the survey
was carried out in December 2013. From an initial sample of 5000 participants, 2060
individuals responded, resulting in a relatively high response rate of 34.6%. Data for Wave 2
were collected in March 2014. 1024 respondents filled out the survey, which indicates an
acceptable retention rate of 57% (Watson and Wooden, 2006).

The resulting sample of the panel survey is diverse and comparable with the US
national population as well as similar surveys that use random sampling strategies (¢.g., Pew
Research Center for the People and the Press, 2013). Respondents varied demographically
regarding age (mean[A/]=52.71, standard deviation [SD] = 14.77), education (range of scale:
1-8, Af = 3.61, SD = 1.44, median [Mdn] = some college), income (ranger of scale 1-8, Af =
4.46, SD = 1.44, Mdn = US$50,000 — US$59,000), sex (49.9% female), and race (78,1%
white). However, slight differences compared to the US Census were prevalent. The sample
of this study is slightly younger, more educated and includes fewer Hispanics. See the
appendix for the formulation of the following measures.

Measures

Discussion network heterogeneity. Discussion network heterogeneity has been
conceptualized and measured in various ways in past research (Eveland and Hively, 2009).
We followed Moy and Gastil’s (2006) approach in considering network heterogeneity as a
multifaceted concept (i.e., ethnic, social, political), using four distinct items for the
measurement (see also Dichl et al., 2016). Respondents were asked how often (1 = never, 10
= all the time) they talk about politics and public affairs online and offline with people a) who
disagree with [them], b) whose political views are different from [theirs], c) from a different
race or ethnicity, and d) from a different social class (Wave 1: Cronbach’s alpha= .94, A=
3.58, SD = 2.45; Wave 2: Cronbach’s alpha = .93, Af = 3.41, SD = 2.36).

Discussion Frequency. Discussion frequency was measured by using nine items that

asked respondents how often (1 = never, 10 = all the time) they talk about politics or public
BURSTING THE FILTER BUBBLE 15

affairs online and offline with their spouse or partner, family relatives, friends, acquaintances,
strangers, neighbors they know well and don’t know well, and co-workers they know well and
don’t know well (Cronbach’s alpha = .87, Mf = 3.27, SD = 1.74).

Political participation. Political participation was differentiated between offline,
online and social media. For offline political participation, respondents were asked to indicate
on a 10-point Likert scale (1 = never, 10 = all the time), how often [they] have a) contacted an
elected public official, b) attended a political rally, c) participated in any demonstrations,
protests, or marches, d) donated money to a campaign or political cause, ¢) participated in
groups that took any location action for social or political reform, and f) been involved in
public interest groups, political action groups, political clubs, political campaigns, or political
party committees (Cronbach’s alpha= .89, Af = 2.15, SD = 1.78). Regarding online political
participation, respondents were questioned how often [they] a) signed or shared an online
petition, b) participated in online polls, c) participated in an online question and answer
session with a politician or public official, d) created an online petition, and e) signed up
online to volunteer to help with a political cause (Cronbach’s alpha = .78, Af = 2.29, SD =
1.70). Finally, social media participation was gauged by inquiring how often [they] a) joined
a political or cause-related group on a social media site, and b) started a political or cause-
related group on a social media site (Pearson =.66, 14 = 1.56, SD = 1.46).

Political efficacy (internal). Internal political efficacy was measured by using three
items derived from previous research (Niemi et al., 1991). Ranging on a 10-point Likert scale
(1 = strongly disagree, 10 = strongly agree), respondents had to indicate to what extent they
think a) “People like me can influence government”, b) “I consider myself well qualified to
participate in politics”, and c) “I have a good understanding of the important political issues
facing our country” (Cronbach’s alpha = .78, Mf = 5.17, SD = 2.24).

Political interest. Political interest was measured by asking respondents two

questions, following prior research (Niemi et al., 1991). Respondents had to indicate on a 10-
BURSTING THE FILTER BUBBLE 16

point scale (1 = not at all, 10 = a great deal) a) how interested [they] are in information about
what’s going on in politics and public affairs and b) how closely [they] pay attention to
information about what’s going on in politics and public affairs (Pearson = .93, Af = 6.67, SD
= 2.70).

Political knowledge. To measure political knowledge, the respondents were asked
eight questions regarding politics in the US. After recoding night and wrong answers (1=right,
0=wrong), the eight items were averaged (Cronbach’s alpha: .75, (f= 0.57, SD = 0.27).

Political ideology. To measure political ideology, respondents were asked to place
themselves on 11-point scales (0 = strong conservative, 11 = strong liberal) for a) social
issues and b) economic issues. The two items were recoded to form a 4-point scale (1 =
neutral, 4 = strong ideology) (Pearson =.75; M = 2.36, SD = 1.00).

News use. News use was distinguished between traditional news media, online news
media and social media news. Traditional news use (e.g., Gil de Zufiiga et al., 2010) was
captured by asking respondents nine items that asked how often they get news (1 = never, 10
= all the time) from network TV news (e.g., ABC, CBS, NBC), local television news (local
affiliate stations), national newspapers (e.g. New York Times, Washington Post, US Today),
local newspapers (e.g., Oregonian, Houston Chronicle, Miami Herald), cable news (c.g.,
CNN, Fox News, MSNBC), radio news (e.g., NPR, talk shows), print media, television
media, and radio (Cronbach’s alpha = .77, Af = 5.26, SD = 1.86).

Online news use was measured using eight items, asking respondents how often they
get news (1 = never, 10 = all the time) from online news sites (e.g., Gawker, Politico,
BuzzFeed), citizen journalism sites (e.g., CNN’s iReport, Examiner.com), hyperlocal news
sites (e.g., Patch.com or other sites dedicated to news in [their] local community), computer
web browser (laptop or desktop), tablet app or browser (iPad, 7 inches or larger), smartphone

app or browser (handheld mobile device smaller than 7 inches), news aggregators (c.g.,
BURSTING THE FILTER BUBBLE 17

Google News, etc.) and sites and apps that collect news (e.g., Flipboard or Pulse) (Cronbach’s
alpha =.78, Af = 2.97, SD = 1.55).

The variable for social media news use was constructed based on four items (e.g., Gil
de Zufiiga et al., 2010), asking respondents how often they use Facebook for getting news,
Twitter for getting news, use social media to stay informed about current events and public
affairs, and use social media to get news from mainstream media. Answer categories ranged
on a 10-point scale (1 = never, 10 = all the time, Cronbach’s alpha = .82, f= 2.67, SD =
2.06).

Controls. Following previous research on network heterogeneity (e.g., Lee et al.,
2014), we also controlled for daily social media use by asking respondents how often (1 =
never, 10 = all the time) they use social media on a typical day (Af = 4.13, SD = 2.99),
Furthermore, following Mutz (2002) and others (¢.g., Eveland and Hively, 2009), we
measured network size to control for the amount of people with whom respondents usually
have political discussions. We asked respondents about how many people they would say they
have talked to a) face-to-face or over the phone about politics or public affairs, and b) via the
Internet, including e-mail, chat rooms, social network sites and micro-blogging sites. Given
the highly skewed variable when averaged, a constant (1) was added before applying a log
transformation to the variable (Af = 0.89, SD = 0.99, min = 0.00, max = 5.62). As for
demographics, we included age, gender (1 = male), race (1= white), annual household
income, and education in our analyses.

Analyses

To answer the research questions and test the hypotheses, including the mediating
effect of discussion frequency, we conducted a series of ordinary least squares regression
analyses, and causal mediation analyses (Baron and Kenny, 1986) with the computing
software R. To control for non-normal data, the mediation analyses were conducted with

1,000 bootstrap samples. What is more, the two-wave survey design allowed us to test for
BURSTING THE FILTER BUBBLE 18

tentative causal directions of the assumed relationships. To do so, we estimated three OLS
regression models (cross-sectional, lagged, autoregressive). It is particularly the
autoregressive model that allows for more confident causal assumptions as it regresses the
independent variable (IV) from wave one on the dependent variable (DV) from wave two
while, at the same time, controlling for the DV from wave one (Finkel, 1995).

Results

The first research question dealt with the relationship between political participation
and network heterogeneity. The OLS results (see Table 1) indicate that none of the forms of
political participation (offline, online, social media) is significantly related to network
heterogeneity. In the second research question we inquired how political efficacy is associated
with network heterogeneity. We equally find no significant relationship in the OLS models.
The first hypothesis posed in this study assumed that individuals who have a strong interest in
politics are more likely to be exposed to a heterogeneous discussion network. The results
show that there is a direct significant positive relationships between political interest and
discussion network heterogeneity in the cross-sectional model (OLS: B = .082, p < .05).
Hence, the more people are interested in politics and public affairs, the more likely they seek
a heterogeneous discussion network. In the second hypotheses we asserted that individuals
who know more about politics, are more likely to be exposed to a heterogeneous discussion
network. However, we did not find support for this assumption in the OLS models.

[Table 1]

The third hypothesis dealt with the positive relationship between political ideology
and network heterogeneity. Here, no significant correlations were detected in the OLS models
either. In addition, we inquired how news media consumption relates to network
heterogeneity (RQ3). The results reveal that traditional news use is positively related with
network heterogeneity, both in the lagged and autoregressive OLS model (lagged: 2 = .077, p

< .05; autoregressive: B = .089, p < .05). Thus, the more people consume traditional news
BURSTING THE FILTER BUBBLE 19

(e.g., newspapers, TV, radio), the more likely they reside in heterogeneous networks.
However, no other form of news media use has been found to be related with discussion
network heterogeneity.

The final research question dealt with the mediating effect of discussion frequency for
the relationship between political attitudes, behavior, news use and discussion network
heterogeneity. The causal mediation analyses have revealed that the positive effect of political
participation online on discussion network heterogeneity is largely dependent on discussion
frequency. Accordingly, when frequently discussing politics, the relationship between online
political participation and network heterogeneity becomes apparent for individuals. Second,
political interest can also lead to a more diverse discussion network over time, but only if
politics is discussed more frequently. Third, while there was no direct effect of political
knowledge on network heterogeneity in the OLS models, discussion frequency works as a
negative mediator; hence decreasing discussion network heterogeneity. Eventually, the
positive effects of traditional news consumption on network heterogeneity were found to be
largely contingent on whether individuals frequently talk to other people about politics and
public affairs. Positive mediation effects were also detected for online news consumption. For
social media news use, the mediation effect was absent, however.

[Table 2 about here]
Discussion

Having recently faced widely debated issues around “information cocoons’, ‘echo
chambers’, and ‘filter bubbles’, this study aimed at shedding light on what political attitudes,
political behavior as well as news consumption behaviors are indicative for US citizens to talk
to people from diverse backgrounds (e.g., social, ethnical, political). What scholars in political
science and communication science have called “discussion network heterogeneity” (Mutz,
2002; Scheufele et al., 2004; 2006), and which has been ascribed a pivotal role for

deliberative democracies (Habermas, 1989), has so-far been mainly considered as an
BURSTING THE FILTER BUBBLE 20

exogenous variable in theoretical and empirical models (except: Brundidge, 2010; Lee et al.,
2014; Choi and Lee, 2015). However, in this study we sought out to identify the major
antecedents for network heterogeneity, while at the same time, also accounting for the
mediating role of discussion frequency.

Findings revealed that the most important factors that lead people to seek a
heterogeneous discussion network are political interest, political participation online as well
as news use (traditional, online). Political knowledge, on the other hand, has been found to
rather attenuate network heterogeneity. However, while the direct relationship between these
factors were found to be limited (¢.g., only present for political interest and traditional news
use), it became clear that citizens need to foster frequent talks about politics and public affairs
in order to get exposed to counter-attitudinal political opinions. Hence, the more politically
interested individuals talk to others about politics and public affairs, the more likely they are
to encounter alternative viewpoints and explanations. Research on selective exposure has
indeed shown that politically interested individuals are not dismissive about opinions and
attitudes that differ from theirs, but that they seek opposing arguments in order to construct
counter-arguments and become prepared for political discussions with the opposition (e.g.,
Garrett, 2009, Valentino et al., 2009).

While this mechanism seems to be at work for politically interested citizens, political
intelligence combined with discussion frequency might function as a damper. The results
have shown that politically savvy people are less likely to encounter heterogeneous discussion
networks if they talk about politics and public affairs frequently. Rather, it seems that
politically knowledgeable people—especially if they talk with others about politics and public
affairs more often—amight be less inclined to listening to counter-attitudinal viewpoints.
These findings point to a dangerous formation of a politically sophisticated elite that becomes

increasingly delineated from the broader, average political forum (cf. Putnam, 1976).
BURSTING THE FILTER BUBBLE 21

What is more, having researched news media effects for a variety of news platforms
(traditional, online, social media), it became apparent that traditional news use can be
considered the strongest predictor for discussion network heterogeneity—and even over time.
Furthermore, the mediation analyses showed that frequent discussions with others about
politics and public affairs do not only mediate the positive effect of traditional news use on
network heterogeneity, it also enhances citizens who consume online news to talk more often
with people from diverse backgrounds. In other words, the more individuals consume news
via traditional and online media outlets and discuss politics with others, the more likely they
are to seek out conversation partners that differ from themselves socially, politically, and/or
ethnically.

These findings are not only in line with Brundidge (2010), who has shown that online
news consumption leads to network heterogeneity through discussion frequency; the results
also provide evidence that the previously identified uni-directional relationship between
traditional news use and network heterogeneity (Scheufele et al., 2004; 2006) also holds in the
reverse order. Eventually, the reason that we do not find a mediation effect of discussion
frequency for the relationship between social media news use and network heterogeneity can
be well-reasoned. Given that consuming news via social media already implies that people
have a large network and frequent discussions in the online sphere (in most cases), it is
plausible that the mediating effect of discussion frequency seems to become obsolete in our
analyses.

Lastly, we found that discussion frequency works as a positive mediator for political
participation online affecting network heterogeneity positively. Hence, while political
participation on social media and offline might not necessarily increase the likeliness to be
exposed to different viewpoints, online political participation (e.g., signing online petitions or
participating in a Q&A with politicians online) might represent actions that could help to

burst the so-called ‘filter bubble.’ Explanations for this finding can be found when
BURSTING THE FILTER BUBBLE 22

considering the nature of the different forms of political participation. Offline political
participation (e.g., participation in rallies, demonstrations or political interest groups)
oftentimes take place within a common social community (e.g., political party, friends, social
circles who stand up for a shared cause). The same can be said about political participation on
social media. Here, the activity remains in the social media sphere, such as starting or joining
a cause-related group but does not extend beyond the familiar social online circles. Yet,
online political participation, which includes creating, sharing, signing a petition or signing up
to volunteer for a political cause, implies that one does not necessarily need to be exposed to
the same group of people. Petitions can take various forms and can focus on a diversity of
topics. What is more, online tools nowadays enable people to become exposed to a variety of
political opinions and backgrounds that one would not have necessarily encountered offline or
on social media (e.g., emails, newsletters, forums, What’s App groups).
Limitations

Although this study has given new insights into the antecedents and mechanisms of
discussion network heterogeneity, there are certain limitations that need to be taken into
account. First, the data could be considered outdated as the surveys were conducted back in
2013 and 2014 respectively. However, as we are still facing many questions regarding the
outcome of the US elections in 2016, the findings of this study can be deemed indicative for
why US citizens have turned away from secking alternative political views and rather resided
in social circles that (re-)confirmed their existing political beliefs. Second, we had to rely on
survey data which are widely known in the field to be prone to social desirability,
untrustworthy answers, and missing values (cf. decreases the sample for final analyses).
However, rather than relying on a small dataset that might be less generalizable, we opted for
a large-scale, representative survey in order to make more compelling conclusions about the
U.S. population. Future research should, however, focus on tracking-data and survey-

techniques that use smartphone and other intrusive online techniques.
BURSTING THE FILTER BUBBLE 23

Thirdly, and lastly, we were only able to identify a direct relationship between
traditional news use, political interest and discussion network heterogeneity respectively. All
other variables that measured political attitude and behavior as well as news use did not yield
positive results, albeit the mediation effects revealed more interesting insights. It is in this
vein that we reason that network heterogeneity is part of a recursive process in which political
attitudes, behavior and news consumption mutually influence and reinforce each other. As a
result, this study has given useful insights into the antecedents and mechanisms of network
heterogeneity when considered as an endogenous construct.

What is more, follow-up studies should investigate discussion network heterogeneity
as a social constructive process. More specifically, future research could take a look at the
individual, cognitive processes that take place when citizens encounter counter-attitudinal
political viewpoints, and how these conversations affect their political attitudes and behaviors
(over time). Another possibility could be an intervention study, focusing on the micro-level
processes of promoting network heterogeneity. A prime example in this regard is the initiative

by the Germany newspaper ZEIT “Deutschland spricht”!

since 2017. A similar project could
be conducted in the US, engaging citizens to meet and talk about politics with fellow citizens
who differ in their political ideas. The results of the personal exchange, the regular meetings
and conversations could be scientifically accompanied by means of follow-up interviews and
surveys, providing insights into the effects of heterogencous discussion networks on beliefs
and attitudes toward democratic principles.
Conclusion

All in all, the findings of this study lend support that political discussion can be
considered the “social glue” (Sunstein, 2002, p. 9) that keeps democratic societies together
and that might lead to the “bursting” of the alleged ‘filter bubbles’ and ‘information cocoons’

these days. Thus, there is a need to create platforms in societies to talk about politics and

public affairs more frequently—either privately, at home, in the public sector, in schools, at
BURSTING THE FILTER BUBBLE 24

universities, or at work. Furthermore, educational institutions and lecturers are in demand to
arouse interest among pupils and students to become engaged with politics and public affairs.
Reading the news regularly (e.g., in the newspapers or online) is part of the process to stay
informed and equip oneself with the necessary tools to participate in political discussions. In
short, the results of this study have shown that strengthening political interest, political
participation online and news media consumption, coupled with more political talks, is key to
ensure a thriving democracy that is based on citizens who seek to encounter diverse opinions,

show interest in various standpoints, and are open to listen to alternative viewpoints.

References

Baer, D. (2016), “The ‘filter bubble’ explains why trump won and you didn’t see it coming”,
The Cut, available at: https://www.thecut.com/2016/1 1/how-facebook-and-the-filter-
bubble-pushed-trump-to-victory.html (accessed 4 November 2019).

Baron, R.M. and Kenny, D.A. (1986), “The moderator-mediator variable distinction in social
psychological research: Conceptual, strategic, and statistical considerations”, Journal
of Personality and Social Psychology, Vol. 51 No. 6, pp. 1173-1182.

Bennett, S.E. (1986), Apathy in America 1960-1984: Causes and Consequences of Citizen
Political Indifference, Transnational Publishers, Dobbs Ferry, NY.

Berlet, C. and Lyons, M. N. (2018), Right-Wing Populism in America: Too Close for
Comfort. The Guilford Press, New York, NY.

Berger, J., Meredith, M. and Wheeler, C. (2008), “Contextual priming: Where people vote
affects how they vote”, in Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences, June
2008.

Brundidge, J. (2010), “Political discussion and news use in the contemporary public sphere:
The “‘accessibility’’ and ‘“traversability’’ of the Internet”, Javnost—The Public, Vol.

17 No. 2, pp. 63-82.
BURSTING THE FILTER BUBBLE 25

Cappella, J.N., Price, V. and Nir, L. (2002), “Argument repertoire as a reliable and valid
measure of opinion quality: Electronic dialogue during campaign 2000”, Political
Communication, Vol. 19 No. 1, pp. 73-93.

Chadwick, A., O’Loughlin, B., and Vaccari, C. (2017), “Why people dual screen political
debates and why it matters for democratic engagement”. Journal of Broadcasting &
Electronic Media, Vol. 61 No. 2, pp. 220-239.

Choi, J., Lee, J.K., and Metzger, E. (2017), “Investigating effects of social media newssharing
on the relationship between network heterogeneity and political participation’,
Computers in Human Behavior, No 75, pp. 25-31.

Choi, J. and Lee, J.K. (2015), “Investigating the effects of news sharing and political interest
on social media network heterogeneity”, Computers in Human Behavior, Vol. 44, pp.
258-266.

Davis, N.T., and Dunaway, J.L. (2016), “Party polarization, media choice, and mass partisan-
ideological sorting”. Public Opinion Quarterly, Vol. 80 No. 1, pp. 272-297.

Diehl, T., Weeks, B.E. and Gil de Zufiiga, H. (2016), “Political persuasion on social media:
Tracing direct and indirect effects of news use and social interaction”, New Media &
Society, Vol. 18 No. 9, pp. 1875-1895.

El-Bermawy, M.M. (2016), “Your filter bubble is destroying democracy”, Wired, available at:
https://www.wired.com/2016/1 1/filter-bubble-destroying-democracy/ (accessed 4
November 2019).

Eveland, W.P., Jr. (2004), “The effect of political discussion in producing informed citizens:
The roles of information, motivation and elaboration”, Political Communication, Vol.
21 No. 2, pp. 177-193.

Eveland W.P.Jr. and Hively M.H. (2009), “Political discussion frequency, network size, and
“heterogeneity” of discussion as predictors of political knowledge and participation”,

Journal of Communication, Vol. 59 No. 2, pp. 205-224.
BURSTING THE FILTER BUBBLE 26

Festinger, L. (1957), A Theory of Cognitive Dissonance. Stanford University Press, Stanford,
CA.

Finkel, 8.E. (1995), Causal Analysis with Panel Data, Sage, Thousand Oaks, CA.

Garrett, K. (2009), “Politically motivated reinforcement seeking: Reframing the selective
exposure debate”, Journal of Communication, Vol. 59 No. 4, pp. 676-699.

Garrett, R.K., Carnahan, D. and Lynch, E.K. (2013), “A turn toward avoidance? Selective
exposure to online political information, 2004-2008”, Political Behavior, Vol. 35 No.
1, pp. 113-134.

Gastil, J., Deess, E.P. and Weiser, P. (2002), “Civic awakening in the jury room: A test of the
connection between jury deliberation and political participation’, Journal of Politics,
Vol. 64 No. 2, pp. 585-595.

Gerstenfeld, P.B., Grant, D. and Chiang, C.-P. (2003), “Hate online: A content analysis of
extremist internet sites”, Analyses of Social Issues and Public Policy, Vol. 3 No. 1, pp.
29-44.

Gil de Zufiiga, H. and Valenzuela, 8. (2011), “The mediating path to a stronger citizenship:
Online and offline networks, weak ties, and civic engagement”, Communication
Research, Vol. 38 No. 3, pp. 397-421.

Gil de Zurfiiga, H., Veenstra, A., Vraga, E. and Shah, D. (2010), “Digital democracy:
Reimagining pathways to political participation”, Journal of Information Technology
& Politics, Vol. 7 No. 1, pp. 36-51.

Gunter, J. and Hughes, R. (2018), “Charlottesville remembered: ‘A battle for the soul of
America’”, BBC, available at: https://www.bbc.com/news/world-us-canada-446 19374
(accessed 4 November 2019),

Habermas, J. (1989), The Structural Transformation of the Public Sphere: An Inquiry into a

Category of Bourgeois Society, MIT Press, Cambridge, MA.
BURSTING THE FILTER BUBBLE 27

Hayes, A.F., Scheufele, D.A. and Huge, M.E. (2006), “Nonparticipation as self-censorship:
Publicly observable political activity in a polarized opinion climate”, Political
Behavior, Vol. 28 No. 3, pp. 259-283.

Horan, P.M. (1971), “Social positions and political cross-pressures: A re-examination’,
American Sociological Review, Vol. 36 No. 4, pp. 650-660.

Huckfeldt, R. and Morehouse Mendez, J. (2008), “Moths, flames, and political engagement:
Managing disagreement within communication networks”, The Journal of Politics,
Vol. 70 No. 1, pp. 83-96.

Huckfeldt, R. and Sprague, J. D. (1995), Citizens, Politics, and Social Communication:
Information and Influence in an Election Campaign, Cambridge University,
Cambridge, U.K.

Huckfeldt, R., Morehouse Mendez, J. and Osborn, T. (2004), “Disagreement, ambivalence,
and engagement: The political consequences of heterogeneous networks”, Political
Psychology, Vol. 25 No. 1, pp. 65-95.

Iyengar, S., Lelkes, Y., Levendusky, M., Malhotra, N., and Westwood, S.J. (2019), “The
origins and consequences of affective polarization in the United States”. Annual
Review of Political Science, Vol. 22, pp. 129-146.

Kim, M. (2018), “How does Facebook news use lead to actions in South Korea? The role of
Facebook discussion network heterogeneity, political interest, and conflict avoidance
in predicting political participation”, Telematics and Informatics, Vol. 35, No 5, pp.
1373-1381.

Kim, Y., and Chen, H.T. (2015), “Discussion network heterogeneity matters: Examining a
moderated mediation model of social media use and civic engagement”, /nternational

Journal of Communication, No. 9, pp. 2344-2365.
BURSTING THE FILTER BUBBLE 28

Kim, Y., Hsu, $.H. and Gil de Zifiiga, H. (2013), “Influence of social media use on
discussion network heterogeneity and civic engagement: The moderating role of
personality traits”, Journal of Communication, Vol. 63 No. 3, pp. 498-516.

Knobloch-Westerwick, S. and Meng, J. (2011), “Reinforcement of the political self through
selective exposure to political messages”, Journal of Communication, Vol. 61 No. 2,
pp. 349-368.

Knobloch-Westerwick, S. and Meng, J. (2009), “Looking the other way: Selective exposure
to attitude-consistent and counterattitudinal political information”, Communication
Research, Vol. 36 No. 3, pp. 426-448.

Knoke, D. (1990), Political Networks: The Structuralist Perspective. Cambridge University
Press, New York, NY.

Kraft, P.W., Lodge, M. and Taber, C.S. (2015), “Why people “don’t trust the evidence”:
Motivated reasoning and scientific beliefs”, The ANNALS of the American Academy of
Political and Social Science, Vol. 658, pp. 121-133.

Kwak, N., Williams, A.E., Wang, X. and Lee, H. (2005), “Talking politics and engaging
politics: An examination of the interactive relationships between structural features of
political talk and discussion engagement”, Communication Research, Vol. 32 No. 1,
pp. 87-111.

Lazarsfeld, P.F., Berelson, B. and Gaudet, H. (1944), The People’s Choice: How the Voter
Makes up His Mind in a Presidential Campaign, Columbia University Press, New
York, NY.

Lee, J., and Choi, Y. (2020), “Effects of network heterogeneity on social media on opinion
polarization among South Koreans: Focusing on fear and political orientation”,
International Communication Gazette, Vol. 82 No. 2, pp. 119-139.

Lee, J.K., Choi, J., Kim, C. and Kim, Y. (2014), “Social media, network heterogeneity, and

opinion polarization”, Journal of communication, Vol. 64 No. 4, pp. 702-722.
BURSTING THE FILTER BUBBLE 29

Levine, J.M. and Russo, E. (1995), “Impact of anticipated interaction on information
acquisition’, Social Cognition, Vol. 13 No. 3, pp. 293-317.

Lu, Y., Lee, J. and Kim, E. (2018), "Network characteristics matter in politics on Facebook:
evidence from a US national survey", Online Information Review, Vol. 42 No. 3, pp.
372-386.

McLeod, J.M., Scheufele, D.A. and Moy, P. (1999a), “Community, communication, and
participation: The role of mass media and interpersonal discussion in local political
participation”, Political Communication, Vol. 16 No. 3, pp. 315-336.

McLeod, J.M., Scheufele, D.A., Moy, P., Horowitz, E.M., Holbert, R.L., Zhang, W., Zubric,
S. and Zubric, J. (1999b), “Understanding deliberation. The effects of discussion
networks on participation in a public forum”, Communication Research, Vol. 26 No.
6, pp. 743-774.

McLeod, J.M., Sotirovic, M. and Holbert, R.L. (1998), “Values as sociotropic judgments
influencing communication patterns”, Communication Research, Vol. 25 No. 5, pp.
254-480.

Meffert, M.F., Chung, S., Joiner, A.J., Waks, L. and Garst, J. (2006), “The effects of
negativity and motivated information processing during a political campaign”, Journal
of Communication, Vol. 56 No. 1, pp. 27-51.

Moy P. and Gastil, J. (2006), “Predicting deliberative conversation: The impact of discussion
networks, media use, and political cognitions”, Political Communication, Vol. 23 No.
4, pp. 443-460.

Mutz, D.C. (2006), Hearing the Other Side: Deliberative Versus Participatory Democracy.
Cambridge University Press, New York, NY.

Mutz, D.C. (2002), “The consequences of cross-cutting networks for political participation”,

American Journal of Political Science, Vol. 46 No. 4, pp. 848-855.
BURSTING THE FILTER BUBBLE 30

Mutz, D.C. and Mondak, J.J. (2006), “The workplace as a context for cross-cutting political
discourse”, Journal of Politics, Vol. 68 No. 1, pp. 140-155.

Nelson, J.L. and Webster, J.G. (2017), “The Myth of Partisan Selective Exposure: A Portrait
of the Online Political News Audience”, Social Media + Society, Vol. 3 No. 3.

Neuman, W.R. (1986), The Paradox of Mass Politics: Knowledge and Opinion in the
American Electorate, Harvard University Press, Cambridge, MA.

Niemi, R.G., Craig, 8.C. and Mattei, F. (1991), “Measuring internal political efficacy in the
1988 National Election Study”, American Political Science Review, Vol. 85 No. 4, pp.
1407-1413.

Nir, L. (2005), “Ambivalent social networks and their consequences for participation”,
International Journal of Public Opinion Research, Vol. 17 No. 4, pp. 422-442.

Nisbet, M.C. and Scheufele, D.A. (2004), “Political talk as a catalyst for online citizenship”,
Journalism & Mass Communication Quarterly, Vol. 81 No. 4, pp. 877-896.

Nisbet, M.C., Moy, P. and Scheufele, D.A. (2003), “Religion, communication, and social
capital”, paper presented to the Political Communication Division of the International
Communication Association (ICA), May, San Diego, USA.

Pariser, E. (2011), The filter bubble: What the Internet is hiding from you, Penguin, New
York, NY.

Park, N., Kee, K. F. and Valenzuela, S. (2009), “Being immersed in social networking
environment”, Cyberpsychology & Behavior, Vol. 12 No. 6, pp. 729-733.

Perrin, A., & Jiang, J. (2018). Almost a quarter of US adults say they are ‘almost constantly’
online. World Economic Forum, available
at: https://www.weforum.org/agenda/20 18/03/about-a-quarter-of-u-s-adults-say -they-

are-almost-constantly-online/ (accessed 4 November 2019).
BURSTING THE FILTER BUBBLE 31

Pew Research Center for the People and the Press (2018), Mfethodology. The American
Trends Panel survey methodology, available at: http://www.people-
press.org/2018/10/15/methodology-207/ (accessed 4 November 2019).

Price, V., Cappella, J. N. and Nir, L. (2002), “Does more disagreement contribute to more
deliberative opinion?”, Political Communication, Vol. 19 No. 1, pp. 95-112.

Prior, M. (2007), Post-broadcast democracy: How media choice increases inequality in

political involvement and polarizes elections, Cambridge University Press, New
York, NY.

Putnam, R.D. (1976), The comparative study of political elites, Prentice Hall, New Jersey, NJ.

Quan-Haase, A. and Young, A. L. (2010), “Uses and gratifications of social media”, Bulletin
of Science, Technology & Society, Vol. 30 No. 5, pp. 350-361.

Rojas, H. (2008), “Strategy versus understanding: How orientations toward political
conversation influence political engagement”, Communication Research, Vol. 35 No.
4, pp. 452-480.

Scheufele, D.A., Hardy, B.W., Brossard, D., Waismel-Manor, I.S. and Nisbet, E.C. (2006),
“Democracy based on difference: Examining the links between structural
heterogeneity, heterogeneity of discussion networks, and democratic citizenship”,
Journal of Communication, Vol. 56 No. 4, pp. 728-753.

Scheufele, D.A., Nisbet, M.C., Brossard, D. and Nisbet, E.C. (2004), “Social structure and
citizenship: Examining the impact of social setting, network heterogeneity, and
informational variables on political participation”, Political Communication, Vol. 21
No. 3, pp. 315-338.

Scheufele, D.A., Shanahan, J. and Kim, 8. (2002), “Who cares about local politics? Media
influences on local political involvement, issue awareness, and attitude strength”,

Journalism and Mass Communication Quarterly, Vol. 79 No. 2, pp. 427-444.
BURSTING THE FILTER BUBBLE 32

Sears, D.O. and Freedman, J.L. (1967), “Selective exposure to information: A critical
review”, Public Opinion Quarterly, Vol. 31 No. 2, pp. 194-213.

Seeman, M. (1966), “Alienation, membership, and political knowledge: A comparative
study”, Public Opinion Quarterly, Vol. 30 No. 3, pp. 353-367.

Sood, G. and Iyengar, 8. (2016), “Coming to Dislike Your Opponents: The Polarizing Impact
of Political Campaigns”, Stanford University, available
at: https://ssm.com/abstract=2840225 (accessed 10 May 2020).

Sorensen, G. (2018), Democracy and democratization: processes and prospects in a changing
world, Routledge, New York, NY.

Stamm, K.R., Emig, A.G. and Hesse, M.B. (1997), ’The contribution of local media to
community involvement”, Journalism and Mass Communication Quarterly, Vol. 74
No. 1, pp. 97-107.

Stroud, N.J. (2010), “Polarization and partisan selective exposure”, Journal of
Communication, Vol. 60 No. 3, pp. 556-576.

Sunstein, C.R. (2018), #Republic: Divided democracy in the age of social media. Princeton
University Press, Princeton, NJ.

Sunstein, C.R. (2006), /nfotopia: How many minds produce knowledge. Oxford University
Press, New York, NY.

Sunstein, C.R. (2002), “The law of group polarization”, Journal of political philosophy, Vol.
10 No. 2, pp. 175-195.

Sunstein, C.R. (2001), Republic.com. Princeton University, Princeton, NJ.

Taber, C.S. and Lodge, M. (2006), “Motivated skepticism in the evaluation of political
beliefs”, American Journal of Political Science, Vol. 50 No. 3, pp. 755-769.

Valentino, N.A., Hutchings, V.L., Banks, A.J. and Davis, A.K. (2009), “Selective exposure in
the Internet age: The interaction between anxiety and information utility”, Political

Psychology, Vol. 30 No. 4, pp. 591-613.
BURSTING THE FILTER BUBBLE 33

Verba, S. and Nie, N.H. (1972), ’Participation in America: Political democracy and social
equality”, University of Chicago Press, Chicago, IL.

Vike-Freiberga, V., Daubler-Gmelin, H., Hammersley, B. and Pessoa Maduro, L.M.P. (2013),
“A free and pluralistic media to sustain European democracy”, Report, High Level
Group on Media Freedom and Media Pluralism, available at:
http://static.eu20 13 .It/uploads/documents/Programos/Discussion%.20documents/Free
%20and%20Pluralistic%20Media%20to%20Sustain%20European™20Democracy.pdf
(accessed 4 November, 2019).

Watson, N. and Wooden, M. (2006), “Modelling longitudinal survey response: The
experience of the HILDA survey”, in ACSPRI social science methodology conference,
pp. 10-13.

Wojcieszak, M. and Price, V. (2010), “Bridging the divide or intensifying the conflict? How
disagreement affects strong predilections about sexual minorities”, Political
Psychology, Vol. 31 No. 3, pp. 315-339.

Wyatt, R. O., Katz, E. and Kim J. (2000), “Bridging the spheres: Political and personal
conversation in public and private spaces”, Journal of Communication, Vol. 50 No. 1,
pp. 71-92.

Zuiderveen Borgesius, F., Trilling, D., Moller, J., Bod, B., de Vreese, C. and Helberger, N.

(2016), “Should we worry about filter bubbles?”, Znternet Policy Review, Vol. 5 No. 1.

Footnotes

1 More information on the project (in German): https://www.zeit.de/serie/deutschland-spricht
BURSTING THE FILTER BUBBLE

Table 1

34

OLS Regression Models Predicting Discussion Frequency and Network Heterogeneity (Cross-Sectional, Lagged, Autoregressive)

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

Discussion Frequency Network Heterogeneity Network Heterogeneity Network Heterogeneity
Cross-Sectional™? Cross-Sectional™? Lagged*? Autoregressive?
B B B B
Block 1: Autoregressive Term
Network Heterogeneity™! - - - A34*** (533)
Constant .000 (.372) .000 (.489) .000 (570) .000 (.533)
Block 2: Demographics & Controls
Age -.059 (.004) .015 (.005) -.024 (.006) -.030 (.005)
Gender (1=male) -.011 (.097) -.029 (.123) .007 (.149) .020 (.139)
Race (1=white) .014 (.122) .024 (.160) .022 (.187) .011 (175)
Income .080** (.034) -.057* (.046) -.063 (.053) -.038 (.050)
Education .030 (.034) .026 (.044) .067 (.052) .056 (.048)
Social Media Use -.019 (.021) .053 (.027) .089* (.032) .066 (.030)
Network Size (log) .385*** (.056) .126*** (.081) .213*** (094) 158*** (089)
Block 3: Political Antecedents
Political Participation Offline .045 (.049) .039 (.064) .093 (.075) .076 (.070)
Political Participation Online .144** (.051) .062 (.068) .107 (.079) .080 (.074)
Political Participation Social Media .058 (.049) -.033 (.064) -.074 (.075) -.060 (.070)
Political Efficacy Internal .050 (.029) .015 (.038) .074 (.045) .068 (.042)
Political Interest .182*** (028) .082* (.037) .084 (.043) .049 (.040)
Political Knowledge -.098** (232) .067 (.306) -.019 (.357) -.048 (.334)
Political Ideology .030 (.050) -.012 (.065) -.019 (.076) -.014 (071)
Block 4: News Media Use
Traditional News .135*** (.030) -.029 (.040) .077* (.047) .089* (.044)
Online News .095** (039) .004 (.052) -.014 (.060) -.016 (.056)
Social Media News .037 (.034) -.053 (.045) .020 (.052) .043 (.049)
Block 5: Mediator
Discussion Frequency = 596*** (053) .286*** (061) .028 (.069)
Total R? 549 629 A57 526
Observations 641 641 641 641

 

Note. Cell entries are final-entry ordinary least squares (OLS), standardized Beta (f) coefficients, standard errors in parentheses; * p < .05,

** pn < 01, *** p< 001
 

 

 

BURSTING THE FILTER BUBBLE 35
Table 2
Causal Mediation Analyses
Discussion Frequency Network Heterogeneity
Cross-sectional”! Lagged*? Autoregressive”
B B B
Political Attitudes
Political Participation Offline 039 .018 002
Political Participation Online .128** .059** .006
Political Participation Social Media 064 .030 .003
Political Efficacy Internal .033 015 001
Political Interest .096*** 046 *** .004
Political Knowledge -.522* -.241* -.023
Political Ideology 044 .020 002
News Media Use
Traditional News 104*** 048 *** .005
Online News .093* .043* .004
Social Media News 026 012 001

 

Note. Cell entries are unstandardized coefficients of the Average Causal Mediation Effect (ACME, indirect
effect); nonparametric bootstrap confidence intervals with 1,000 iterations; * p <.05, ** p< .01, *** p< .001

 

Political Participation Offline

 

Political Participation Online

 

 

Political Participation Social Media

 

 

Political Efficacy (internal)

 

 

Political Interest

 

 

Political Knowledge

 

Political Ideology

 

 

Traditional News Use

 

Online News Use

 

Social Media News Use

 

N A
Discussion
Frequency

 

 

 

 

 

Network
Heterogeneity

 

 

 

Figure 1. Conceptual mediation model of network heterogeneity.

 
