Filter Bubble and Enframing: On the Self-Affirming

Dynamics of Technologies

Andreas Beinsteiner
Ph.D. Student
Institute of Philosophy
Leopold-Franzens-Universitat
Innsbruck

andreas.beinsteiner@gmail.com

ABSTRACT

This paper tries to relate the recent concerns about personalized
filtering on the internet to Martin Heidegger’s philosophy of
technology. In “The Filter Bubble”, Eli Pariser describes how
personalized filtering of online contents may result in a “self
loop”, amplifying the user’s interests and opinions. It will be
argued that there are structural similarities between the concept of
the filter bubble and Heidegger’s concept of technology as
enframing. Also the latter addresses a filtered perception of reality
which reinforces itself. In both cases, the dynamics under
consideration ultimately threaten human freedom. A comparison
of filter bubble and enframing might not only produce a deeper
understanding of both phenomena, but reveal the discussion of
self-affirming dynamics as an essential task for media studies.

Keywords
enframing, filter bubble, Heidegger, technology

1. INTRODUCTION

As the vast amount of data on the Internet is growing faster
than ever, filtering becomes a necessity. Internet giants like
Facebook or Google have chosen a way that is different from the
editorial selection typical of traditional broadcast media. They
offer personalized filters instead of general ones.

While for a long time this break with the agenda setting of
traditional broadcast media was considered an advantage of the
Internet, in the new millennium a different a different perspective
evolved. In a book released in 2011, Eli Pariser expresses his
concerns about this tendency towards personalization on the web.
As personalization becomes more and more usual, he argues, we
will increasingly become embedded in a filter bubble, in “your
own personal, unique universe of information that you live in
online.” ([10]) The pervasive tendency towards personalization is
problematic, as it “moves us very quickly toward a world in which
the Internet is showing us what it thinks we want to see, but not
necessarily what we need to see.” ([10])

The idea is not new: In 2001, Cass Sunstein conceived
personalized news as “The Daily We” and wondered if the
Internet really was a blessing for democracy (cf. [13]). Also,
concerns have been raised for quite a while about a fragmentation
of the public sphere, where communication only takes place
between people with similar interests and attitudes.

My claim in this paper is that the filter bubble may serve as a
model that illustrates a more general concept about the self-
affirming dynamics of our technologies: Martin Heidegger’s
concept of the enframing. Relating these two ideas may result in
mutual benefits: it might help to establish a better understanding

of Heidegger’s notoriously difficult and notoriously
misunderstood concerms, and in turn the kind of problem that Eli
Pariser calls attention to may be grasped more precisely in
Heidegger’s terms. Ultimately the paper suggests developing the
concept of a local enframing as a critical tool for media studies.

2. FILTER BUBBLE

Facebook and Google were the places where Pariser first
became aware of the effects of personalization. “I noticed one day
that the conservatives had disappeared from my Facebook feed”,
he tells us. “And what it turned out was going on was that
Facebook was looking at which links I clicked on, and it was
noticing that, actually, I was clicking more on my liberal friends’
links that on my conservative fnends’ links. And without
consulting me about it, it had edited them out.” ([10])

The same kind of editing, Pariser found out, also happened
on Google: He asked two friends to search for “Egypt” on Google.
The results were drastically different: “Daniel didn’t get anything
about the protests in Egypt at al in his first page of Google results.
Scott’s results were full of them. And this was the big story of the
day at that time. That’s how different these results are becoming.”

({10])

Personalization is used at a lot of other places too: On online
dating platforms, obviously, but also more and more on news
portals. Why is Pariser worried about this development? He sees a
number of problematic effects that occur with the rise of filtering.

One serious consequence for democracy is the decline of the
public sphere: “In the filter bubble, the public sphere — the realm
in which common problems are identified and addressed — is just
less relevant.” ({11], p. 148) Another one is the “friendly world
syndrome”: “[S]ome important public problems will disappear.
Few people seek out information about homelessness, or share it,
for that matter. In general, dry, complex, slow moving problems —
a lot of the truly significant issues — won't make the cut.” ([11], p.
150f) This relates to another issue: “[I]nstead of a balanced
information diet, you can end up surrounded by information junk
food.” ({10])

However, at the centre of all these tendencies there is one
effect that Pariser calls “the you loop:” “The filter bubble tends to
dramatically amplify confirmation bias — in a way, it’s designed
to. Consuming information that conforms to our ideas of the
world is easy and pleasurable; consuming information that
challenges us to think in new ways or question our assumptions is
frustrating and difficult.” ([11], p. 88) Personalized filtering
directs us towards doing the former: ,,[T]he filter bubble isn’t
tuned for a diversity of ideas or of people. It’s not designed to
introduce us to new cultures. As a result, living inside it, we may
miss some of the mental flexibility and openness that contact with
difference creates.” ([11], p. 101) This is not only a danger for
democracy, but also for freedom. For freedom, Pariser explains,
cannot be reduced to being able to do what you want. First you
need to know what is possible to do. (cf. [11], p. 112) “When you
enter a filter bubble, you’re letting the companies that construct it
choose which options you’re aware of. You may think you are the
captain of your own destiny, but personalization can lead you
down a road to a kind of informational determinism in which what
you’ve clicked on in the past determines what you see next — a
Web history you’re doomed to repeat. You can get stuck in a
static, ever-narrowing vision of yourself — an endless you-loop.”
({11], p. 16)

Also Cass Sunstein perceived filtering as a threat to
democracy and freedom.' An important difference, however, is
that Sunstein was concerned with personalization that the user
consciously chooses. This does not hold in the filter bubble:
“When you tum on Fox News or read The Nation, you’re making
a decision about what kind of filter to use to make sense of the
world. It’s an active process, and like putting on a pair of tinted
glasses, you can guess how the editor’s leaning shapes your
perception. You don’t make the same lind of choice with
personalized filters. They come to you — and because they drive
up profits for the Web site that uses them, they’ll become harder
and harder to avoid.” ([11], p. 10) So for Pariser maybe the most
dangerous thing about filter bubbles is that they are not aware of
them: “In fact, from within the bubble, it’s nearly impossible to
see how biased it is.” ([11], p. 10) Accordingly, the mission of his
book, and the first step towards solving the problem, is to render
the filter bubble visible (cf. [11], p. 20). A second step would be
to think about how serendipity happens and how it could be
promoted by software design decisions (cf. [11], p. 235f).

My claim in what follows will be that the filter bubble can
serve as a model to understand a more generic concept about the
self-amplifying dynamics of technologies: Martin Heidegger’s
concept of technology as enframing.

3. ENFRAMING

Martin Heidegger’s esoteric and idiosyncratic terminology
has given rise to a lot of misunderstandings. As often, building
bridges between different kinds of vocabularies might help to
clarify things. I will try to do this by relating the dynamics Eli
Pariser describes to the ones Heidegger describes.

If for Pariser it is the enormous amount of data online that
requires filtering, Heidegger’s concern is the inexhaustible
richness of Being getting filtered. Being is no mythic or divine
entity but simply refers to the meaning of the word “to be”, to our

understanding of what it means that something “is”. So Being
obviously is strongly intertwined with language.

The inexhaustible richness of Being is not a kind of
mythological postulate, but a simple consequence of the
historicity of Being. As Heidegger tries to show, every culture and
epoch had its own understanding of Being. This understanding
changes, as language changes. And as we have no idea about how

 

' “Unanticipated encounters, involving unfamiliar and even

irritating topics and points of view, are central to democracy and
to freedom itself.” ([13])

language might develop, there is no basis for determining a
definite set of possible understandings of Being.

As a consequence, every historical culture has its own
clearing of Being, which is at the same time concealment and
unconcealment. While a vast majority of possible understandings
of reality remain hidden for us, a certain understanding unfolds.
Thus with every clearing of Being, only certain few aspects of
reality become accessible for us.

This means that the respective clearing defines our
possibilities in thinking and acting, and, more fundamentally, our
possible horizons of meaning. Richard Rorty puts it this way: “For
Heidegger — early and late — what one is is the practices one
engages in, and especially the language, the final vocabulary, one
uses. For that vocabulary determines what one can take as a
project.” ([12], p. 109)’ The clearing of Being thus provides a
refined concept for discussing a matter that also Pariser is
concemed with: “Not knowing that it is possible to be an
astronaut is just as much a prohibition against becoming one as
knowing and being barred from doing so.” ([11], p. 112f.) The
matter at stake is freedom.

If the clearing of Being is historical, it can change. With
Heidegger, we can grasp freedom precisely as the mutability of
the conceptual framework that mediates our access to reality.
Freedom relies on what I want to call hermeneutic oscillation: on
a condition where various modes of unconcealment are
suspending and balancing each other.*

We can consider the clearing of Being as a filtering of the
inexhaustible richness of Being: “Beings can be as beings only if
they stand within and stand out within what is cleared in this
clearing.” ([7], p. 178) Freedom thus requires that this filtering
must not become static: It must not always be the same aspects of
reality that get filtered out or that make it through the filter. Only
then new aspects of reality may appear and provide us with new
possibilities of thinking and action.

Heidegger’s history of Being could thus be rephrased as a
history of filters on the possible meanings of Being. In the modern
age, or, as Heidegger puts it, “the Age of the World Picture”, “a
essential decision takes place regarding what is, in its entirety.”
([8], p. 130) Man is understood as the subject and all entities
become objects: “Man becomes that being upon which all that is,
is grounded as regards the manner of its Being and its truth. Man
becomes the relational center of that which is as such.” ([8], p.
128) As man is placed as the relational center of everything that
is, the world becomes a picture, a representation for him.

“Here to represent [vor-stellen] means to bring what is
present at hand [das Vorhandene] before oneself as something

 

2 As we will see in the course of the following considerations, the
clearing of being is not only constituted by language, but also
by technologies and technical artefacts. Both aspects have been
addressed frequently in Heidegger’s writings.

3 For Heidegger’s concept of freedom, cf. “On the Essence of
Truth, p. 115-138 in [7]. Understood in this way, freedom is not
something that man possesses as a property. “At best, the
converse holds: freedom, ek-sistent, disclosive Da-sein
possesses man — so originally, that only it secures for humanity
that distictive relatedness to being as a whole which first founds
all history.” ([7], p. 127)
standing over against, to relate it to oneself, to the one
representing it, and to force it back into this relationship to
oneself as the normative realm.” ([8], p. 131) This means that
everything that is, is, insofar it can be related to man. With other
words, everything that cannot be related to man is filtered from
the clearing of Being: all aspects of reality that are not relevant to
man cease to exist.*

My suggestion is that the age of the world picture, as a
reconfiguration of the ontological sphere, structurally corresponds
to the introduction of personalized filtering on the internet:
Everything that cannot be related to oneself as relevant in some
way is filtered out of existence.

For Heidegger, the modern reconfiguration of the clearing of
Being has serious ethical consequences, as it implies that in
everything man does, he is only concerned with aspects of reality
that in some way relate to himself. However, this constellation is
radicalized with the advent of modern technology.

Heidegger calls the Wesen of technology the enframing [Ge-
stell]. While Wesen usually is translated as essence, I suggest that
ontological dynamics is a more appropriate translation. Por in
Heidegger the notion does not refer to any supposed nature of
things, but to the way they relate to changes in the clearing of
Being.” Technology, according to Heidegger, is not merely a
means. “Technology is a mode of revealing. The dynamics of
technology are situated in the realm where revealing and
unconcealment take place, where aletheia, truth, happens.” ([7], p.
319°)

What are those ontological effects of technology that
Heidegger describes as Ge-stell? Everything is revealed only as
standing-reserve [Bestand], things may only enter the clearing of
Being to the extent that they can be conceptualized as an
instrument or challenged as a resource. Observe that the Ge-stell
mode of revealing is narrower than the world-picture mode:

 

* As the man of the modern age, according to Heidegger, is
metaphysically conceived as animal rationale, there are first
and foremost two modes of that relation: either things serve as
an experience [Erlebnis] for man as an animal, or things can be
measured scientifically by rational man.

° Although Heidegger dedicates several pages to explaining his
reinterpretation of the term (cf. eg. [7], p. 334ff), many
interpreters still hold on to the traditional notion of Wesen.

© Translation modified. German orginal: ,,Die Technik west in
dem Bereich, wo Entbergen und Unverborgenheit, wo aletheia,
wo Wahrheit geschieht.~ ([6], p. 17) This statement has to be
read carefully: The realm, where the dynamics of technology,
understood in the Heideggerian sense as enframing, are situated,
is the clearing of Being. In many of his writings, Heidegger
indicates that this clearing is not only constituted by language,
but also by artifacts, tools and machines (cf. e.g. the fool
analysis in “Being and Time”). So there is always a
technological aspect in the clearing of Being. This aspect,
however, is to be distinguished from enframing as a certain
tendency in the dynamics of the clearing of Being in the age of
technology. For any attempt to estimate Heidegger’s relevance
for media studies, it is essential to clarify the exact relation
between technological artifacts and the tendency of enframing:
What kinds of artifacts and infrastructures do promote
enframing, and why?

“Whatever stands by in the sense of standing-reserve no longer
stands against us as object.” ([7], p. 322) Now what in some way
relates to man may no more pass through the filter but only that
which is useful for our purposes. This means that our possibilities
of being in the world become more narrow too:’ Heidegger
contrasts the river Rhine, technologically perceived as an energy
supplier or as a tourist attraction, with the Rhine as it appears in
the poetry of Hélderlin (cf.[7], p. 321).

Technology filters reality in a way so that we perceive only
the aspects of reality where it is successful." And the more we
perceive technology as successful, the more it will reinforce not
only its own take on reality, but also the corresponding horizons
of meaning that drive our activities. “Man clings to what is readily
available and controllable [...], concealing as a fundamental
occurrence has sunk into forgottenness.” ([7], p. 132f) In a similar
way, Pariser states that the filter bubble transforms “known
unknowns into unknown unknowns”. ([11], p. 106) We can
explore this structural resemblance further: “Left to their own
devices, personalization filters serve as a kind of invisible
autopropaganda, indoctrinating us with our own ideas, amplifying
our desire for things that are familiar and leaving us oblivious to
the dangers lurking in the dark territory of the unknown.” ([11], p.
15) As everything is filtered that is mysterious or does not fit into
the established conceptualizations, those conceptualizations
become static. “By disavowing itself in and for forgottenness, the
mystery leaves historical man in the sphere of what is readily
available to him [...],” states Heidegger. And Pariser stresses that
“Tijf personalization is too accute, it could prevent us from
coming into contact with the mind-blowing, perception-shattering,
experiences and ideas that change how we think about the world
and ourselves.” ([11], p. 15)

Both in the filter bubble and in enframing, man is stuck in a
certain conceptualization of reality. When Heidegger says that
thus the essence [Wesen] of man is threatened by technology (cf.
[7], p. 333), this does not involve any essentialist claims about the
nature of man. On the contrary, it means that the ontological
dynamics of man have come to stagnate; that the indefinite
possibilities of what man might be have been narrowed down to
one single understanding of man that is amplified and reinforced
by the relational system of our technologies. In the same way, “the
economics of personalization,” according to Pariser, “push toward
a static conception of personhood.” ([11], p. 216)

 

7 “The only thing that is ever questionable is how we can measure
and fathom and exploit the world as quickly as possible, as
securely as possible, as completely as possible [...].” ([2], p.
Alf.)

® Quantification is an essential feature in the filtering that renders
technological access to reality successful: “Calculation refuses
to let anything appear except what is countable. Everything is
only whatever it counts. [...] Only because number can be
infinitely multiplied, irrespective of whether this occurs in the
direction of the large or the small, can the consuming dynamics
of calculation hide behind its products and lend to calculative
thinking the semblance of productivity - whereas already in its
anticipatory grasping, and not primarily in its subsequent
results, such thinking lets all beings count only in the form of
what can be set at our disposal and consumed..” ([3], p 235,
translation modified)
This section tried to make transparent that Heidegger’s
philosophy of technology does not address any supposed
opposition of nature and technology, but a self-amplifying
dynamics that structurally resembles the one described by Eli
Pariser’s filter bubble. One thing we can learn from these
similarities is that there are actually multiple ways of drawing on
Heidegger for a critical enquiry into today’s media environments.
The more traditional way would be analyze if and how media and
technological infrastructures contribute to enframing by making
everything available as a standing reserve. However, for those
who do not accept Heidegger’s narrative about the totality of
technological access to the world in our age, there exists another
way of making use of Heidegger's considerations. Since
enframing, like the filter bubble, is about self-amplifying
dynamics, the concept can also be employed without any claims
of totality, to identify local enframings:? conceptual frameworks
that reinforce themselves, horizons of meaning that we have
become stuck in without being aware of it. In this approach,
concrete media or technological infrastructures could be analyzed
with respect to their ontological dynamics: Do they promote
hermeneutic oscillation or do they establish local enframings? Do
they allow for a mutability of concepts, or do they reinforce
established understandings? The first crucial step in destabilizing
local enframings, however, might be to realize that we always are
exposed to a clearing of Being that is constituted by our language
and our technologies and that is in danger of becoming static.

4. THE SELF-AFFIRMING DYNAMICS OF
TECHNOLOGIES

According to Heidegger, the lock-in in one clearing of Being is
particularly strong because man is not aware of the filtering that is
at work in this clearing: “Man stands so decisively in subservience
to on the challenging-forth of enframing that he does not grasp
enframing as a claim, that he fails to see himself as the one spoken
to, and hence also fails in every way to hear in what respect he ek-
sists, in terms of his ontological dynamics [Wesen], in a realm
where he is addressed [...].” ([7], p. 332, translation modified)

After Heidegger had conceived the revealing in the mode of
enframing as the supreme danger, his text takes an irritating turn.
He refers to a verse of Hélderlin to declare that “where danger is,
grows [t]he saving power also.” ([7], p. 333)

This might seem arbitrary, but Heidegger explains: “The danger
itself, if it is as the danger, is the saving power.” ([8], p. 41) If the
danger becomes perceived explicitly as the danger, this might free
us from the lock-in in enframing: “[W]hen we once open
ourselves expressly to the ontological dynamics [Wesen] of
technology we find ourselves unexpectedly taken into a freeing

 

° The notion of a local enframing is choosen in order to discard
two aspects of totality connected to Heidegger’s original
concept: 1. the planetary dimension of enframing which
pervades all of the contemporary world and 2. the totality of the
specific interpretation of reality that Heidegger links to the self-
affirming dynamics of technology. As we can learn from
Pariser, such dynamics may be restricted to small groups or
even individuals, and they are not necessarily linked to this
specific understanding of reality. The point here is not to qualify
the scope of Heidegger’s cultural diagnostics, but to enhance
the applicability of the concept for analyzing self-affirming
dynamics in a variety of concrete technological settings.

claim.” ([7], p. 331, translation modified) Heidegger seems to
hope that, as the ontological dynamics of technology become
more intense, they might also become visible as such: as a
selective filtering that amplifies established concepts and horizons
of meaning.

Self-affirming dynamics are not exclusive to technology but
denote a danger that always threatens man. Being exposed to the
potential infinity of possible ways of conceptualizing the world,
man tends to hold on to those kinds of conceptualizations that he
already is familiar with: “As ek-sistent, Dasein is insistent.” ([7],
p. 132) Also for Pariser, the consumption of news that confirm
one’s own belief existed before the filter bubble. “And while this
phenomenon has always been true, the filter bubble automates it.
In the bubble, the proportion of content that validates what you
know goes way up.”([11], p. 89)

I want to suggest that the automation of the phenomenon might be
a crucial point. As the self-affirming dynamics in questions have
been objectified into software by several different internet
platforms who offer personalization, and as Pariser has written a
book about it, the problem has become explicit. In a way, the
danger now is unconcealed as the danger. Pariser’s aim was to
render the filter bubble visible, just like Heidegger’s concem was
whether enframing would reveal itself as such.

The structural similarities of filter bubble and enframing indicate
that a useful notion of a local enframing can be developed.
However, one has to restrain from a premature identification of
filter bubble and enframing. Instead, the differences of the two
concepts have to be clarified. Here only a few of these differences
are exposed in order to raise some productive questions.

I. One difference is that the filter bubble seems to be an
epistemological problem, while the enframing is an ontological
one. The filter bubble defines what we are able to find out about,
while the clearing of Being ultimately defines what is. This is the
case, because the filter bubble is not our only access to reality. We
also find out about things when we are not online. But, in
contrast, there is nothing outside of the clearing of Being.

This difference, however, might blur, as we spend more and more
of our lives online and as the internet begins to colonize our
offline world with the development of augmented reality. If
ultimately, as Pariser describes (cf. [11], p. 207ff), our whole lives
might be absorbed by the filter bubble, would those filters thus
obtain the ontological totality that Heidegger envisioned? This
might depend upon whether interactions with other individuals in
the social sphere might allow us to break through the filters. We
are thus lead to another important difference.

II. While, according to Pariser, every individual human being is
enclosed in its own filter bubble, Heidegger became less and less
concemed with individuals in the course of his philosophical
career. After the individualistic “Being and Time”, he came to be
more occupied with the fate of the Germans as a “historic people”.
After World War two, when his philosophy of technology took
shape, he was interested in mankind as such, since he supposed
that with technology, European thinking had pervaded the whole
globe. Every individual is enclosed in its own filter bubble, but
the whole mankind is enclosed in enframing. So while social
interaction and communication might crash our individual
bubbles, Heidegger is interested in the basic understandings that
we all already take for granted and which thus cannot be shaken
that easily by communication. In particular this is the case for
understandings which are entailed by the communication
infrastructures themselves.!° Moreover, it is the case for

understandings that influenced the design of our communication
technologies.

This raises also the question about the relation of individual filter
bubbles and the ones that pervade the whole society. Filtering
algorithms are developed and programmed on the basis of certain
established understandigs and horizons of meaning. As Heidegger
mentions, the “functionaries” for “making public civilized
opinion” are “at once driver and driven” ([4], p. 212), they
constitute understandings and are constituted by them. If one tries
to follow Pariser’s suggestion and looks for ways to design and
implement serendipity (cf. [11], p. 235f), one has to be aware:
Also programming decisions tend to be a result of a filtered
perception of reality.

Ill. There is a certain ambivalence within Pariser’s grasp of the
problem. Although he generally seems to be concerned about a
loop that reinforces ones attitudes and interests (as described in
Section 2), there are also some passages where he seems to be
worried that the authentic self of the user could become
manipulated by the filters: “You become trapped in a you loop,
and if your identity is misrepresented, strange patterns begin to
emerge, like reverb from an amplifier.” ({11], p. 125) If the
problem was only that of a misrepresentation of an authentic self,
then building Popperian falsification strategies into the filtering
algorithms (cf. [11], p.132ff) might really help. This
understanding of the problem, however, drops the insight, how
deeply we are shaped by our language and our technologies. |!

As he became aware of how fundamentally man was constituted
by the clearing of Being, Heidegger stopped using his early notion
of authenticity. “For there is no such thing as a man who is as a
man singly and solely by his own virtue.” ([7], p. 337, translation
modified) It is worth noting that Heidegger’s “Question
Concerning Technology” contains an answer to Werner
Heisenberg. Heisenberg had described the technological age as a
condition where man always and everywhere only encounters
himself (cf. “Das Naturbild der heutigen Physik”, pp. 109-127 in
[9]). Heidegger objects that man “ek-sists, in terms of his

 

'0 How communication technologies interfere with language
became an essential question in several of Heidegger’s late
writings. E.g., in [1], Heidegger addresses the univocity (i.e. the
suppression of hermeneutic oscillation) that language needs to
assume in order to become suitable for automated data
processing. This is an issue that continues to be relevant as the
semantic web emerges. It might be instructive to discuss
ontology engineering in the context of Heidegger’s critique of
metaphysics.

'! Maybe Pariser’s occasional worries about the manipulation of
an authentic self express discomfort about the fact that this
sphere, where man is addressed and constituted, is, to an
increasing extent, organized according to the interests of private
and profit-oriented corporations. Pariser calls this “the
commercialization of everything — even of our sensory
apparatus itself‘ ([11], p. 215) Doubtlessly, the static self
produced by filter bubbles is useful for profit-oriented
enterprises as it makes the behaviour of consumers computable.
For Heidegger, however, the desire to calculate human
behaviour is not just an effect of capitalism but rather of the
cybernetic paradigm in the age of technology.

ontological dynamics [Wesen], in a realm where he is addressed,
so that he can never encounter only himself.” ([7], p. 332,
translation modified, emphasis in the original text) The realm
where he is addressed is the historical clearing of Being which is
constituted by language and technological artefacts. In this respect
Heidegger agrees with many contemporary theorists of media and
technology: There is no authentic pretechnological self. However,
such a notion of authenticity is not needed as normative concept
for critique, since the Heideggerian understanding of freedom as
hermeneutic oscillation provides an alternative normative
perspective. From this perspective, the identification of self-
amplifying tendencies in our technologies — which is, though on
different levels, the aim of both Heidegger and Pariser — assumes
an essential role in any critical inquiry into our evolving online
media environments.

5. ACKNOWLEDGMENTS

This work was supported by a stipend of the Vizerektorat fiir
Forschung, Leopold-Franzens- Universitat Innsbruck.

6. REFERENCES
[1] Heidegger, Martin. 1989. Uberlieferte Sprache und
technische Sprache. Erker: St. Gallen.

Heidegger, Martin. 1996. Hélderlin’s Hymn “The Ister”’.
Indiana University Press, Bloomington.

[2

fair

[3

=

Heidegger, Martin. 1998. Pathmarks. Cambridge University
Press, Frankfurt am Main.

[4

fa

Heidegger, Martin. 2001. Poetry, Language, Thought.
HarperCollins, New York.

Heidegger, Martin. 2002. Die Technik und die Kehre. Klett-
Cotta, Stuttgart.

Heidegger, Martin. 2004. Vortriige und Aufsdtze. Klett-
Cotta, Stuttgart.

[5

=

[6

Se

[7

&

Heidegger, Martin. 2008. Basic Writings. HarperCollins,
New York.

Heidegger, Martin. 2008. The Question Concerning
Technology and Other Essays. Harper & Row, New York.

[8

oe

[9

=

Heisenberg, Werner. 1971. Schritte iiber Grenzen. Piper,
Miinchen.

[10] Pariser, Eli. 2011. Beware online filter bubbles. TED talk.
http://www.ted.com/talks/eli_pariser_beware_online_filter_b
ubbles.html.

[11] Pariser, Eli. 2011. The Filter Bubble. Viking, London.

[12] Rorty, Richard. Contingency, Irony, and Solidarity.
Cambridge Unversity Press, New York.

[13] Sunstein, Cass. 2001. The Daily We. Boston Review.
http://bostonreview.net/BR26.3/sunstein.php
