ResearchGate

See discussions, stats, and author profiles for this publication at: https://www.researchgate.net/pu blication/36287 6047
From mass to automated media Revisiting the ‘filter bubble'

Chapter - August 2022

DOI: 10.4324/9780429288654

CITATION READS
1 29

2 authors, including:
5 Mark Andrejevic
Monash University (Australia)
78 PUBLICATIONS 3,849 CITATIONS

SEE PROFILE

All content following this page was uploaded by Mark Andrejevic on 23 August 2022.

The user has requested enhancement of the downloaded file.
Chapter 2

 

From mass to automated media
Revisiting the ‘filter bubble’

Mark Andrejevic and Zala Volcic

 

In the face of social media’s problems with fake news and political polarisation, the
ready response has been to propose economic, technical, and educational fixes.
Reacting to US concerns about Russian disinformation campaigns, for example,
Facebook executive Rob Goldman tweeted: ‘There are easy ways to fight this. [...]
Finland, Sweden and Holland have all taught digital literacy and critical thinking
about misinformation to great effect.”! A recent report by the Data & Society
Research Institute considered a range of possible solutions, including fortified fact-
checking and verification services and incentives for de-emphasising fake content and
closing down the accounts of those who circulate it.? "The hope embedded in such
responses is that the overarching commercial model we have developed for circulating,
news and information online can be salvaged for the purposes of informed commu-
nication and democratic deliberation. Some combination of self-regulation by plat-
form giants, public pressure to reconfigure economic incentives, anti-trust measures,
and increased media literacy on the part of users has been advanced as a strategy for
curbing the flood of politically polarised misinformation online.

This chapter argues that the concerns raised by commercial social media are
significant and structural, which means the commercial model we have developed
is not salvageable solely through education and self-regulation. Rather we need to
critically examine the broader connections between media infrastructures and
social policies that erode the resources for mutual recognition and collective
deliberation. The question is not just what kind of information people receive
online, but the conditions under which they receive it, and the disposition these
foster. Diverse content and perspectives are necessary but not sufficient for
democratic deliberation. Meaningful deliberative processes rely equally upon the
formation of a ‘discourse ethics’, which, ‘by requiring that perspective-taking be

1 Sheera Frenkel, ‘Fact-Checking a Facebook Executive’s Comments on Russian Inter-
ference’ The New York Times (19 February 2018) www.nytimes.com/2018/02/19/
technology /facebook-executive-russia-tweets-fact-check.html, accessed 30 August
2019.

2 Robyn Caplan, Lauren Hanson and Joan Donovan, Dead Reckoning: Navigating
Content Moderation After Fake News’ (Data & Society Report, 21 February 2018)
https: //datasociety.net/output/dead-reckoning, accessed 30 August 2019.
18 Mark Andrejevie and Zala Volcic

 

general and reciprocal, builds the moment of empathy into the procedure of
coming to a reasoned agreement’.* The critique of online ‘filter bubbles’ can
have the misleading effect of diverting attention away from the context and
material conditions of news reception and the broader societal conditions within
which these are embedded, including the ongoing regulatory assault on ‘social
bonds and obligations, social conscience, and social welfare’.> The shift in the
news environment associated with the platform economy coincides with a political
assault on the conditions that enable citizens to take into consideration the needs,
perspectives, and values of others, including those whom they do not know and
may never meet, but who nevertheless form part of their shared communities.

I. ‘Everyone’s got their goons’

Many of the proposed solutions to the pathologies of commercial media platforms
assume a shared understanding of the problem and the civic will to solve it. It is
possible to discern quite different subject positions from those that share civic
good will - indeed, ones that are cultivated by and thrive on the logics of polar-
isation. Consider, for example, the conservative businessman interviewed by the
New York Times who views right-wing conspiracy theories as a form of entertain-
ment: ‘I just like the satisfaction [...] It’s like a hockey game. Everyone’s got their
goons. Their goons are pushing our guys around, and it’s great to see our goons
push back.”® The subject position here is one that seeks out fake news as a form of
politicised entertainment because it confirms one’s prejudices and preconceptions.

There is another subject position that is worth taking into consideration: that
which questions the efficacy of fact-checking itself. Consider the example of Florine
Goldfarb, one of the ‘unwitting’ Americans who promoted events orchestrated by
Russian Internet trolls during the 2016 presidential campaign.” When confronted
with the fact that she had posted information generated by a Russian propaganda
organisation on her pro-Trump Facebook page, her response was dismissive: ‘I
don’t believe that. That’s bulls—.”® Such responses highlight the impasse of media

3 Jiirgen Habermas, Moral Consciousness and Communicative Action (MIT Press 1990) 11.

4 Eli Pariser, The Filter Bubble: How the New Personalized Web is Changing What We
Read and How We Think (Penguin 2011).

5 Jo Littler, ‘Where the files are: Wendy Brown Talks to Jo Littler’ (2018) 68 Sound-
ings 14, 14.

6 Sabrina Tavernise, ‘As Fake News Spreads Lies, More Readers Shrug at the Truth’ The
New York Times (6 December 2016) www.nytimes.com/2016/12/06/us/fake-new
s-partisan-republican-democrat.html, accessed 30 August 2019.

7 Scott Shane, ‘How Unwitting Americans Encountered Russian Operatives Online’
The New York Times (18 February 2018) www.nytimes.com/2018/02/18 /us/poli
tics /russian -operatives-facebook-twitter.html, accessed 30 August 2019.

8 Bryan Logan, ‘CNN interview with a Trump supporter goes sideways after she learns
she unknowingly touted pro-Trump events coordinated by Russian trolls’ Business
Insider (21 February 2018) www.businessinsider.com/cnn-interviews-woman-unkno
wingly-manipulated-by-russian-trolls-2018-2, accessed 30 August 2019.
From mass to automated media 19

 

education: it runs the danger of simply pushing the problem of fact-checking back a
level. The philosopher Slavoj Zizek has described this vertiginous infinite recess of
credibility as the retreat of ‘symbolic efficiency’, suggesting that in the con-
temporary information environment, ‘what is increasingly undermined is precisely
the symbolic trust which persists against all skeptical data’.?

Il. The role of a ‘civic disposition’

The issues raised by political polarisation thus reach beyond the circulation of
content to the ways in which information is experienced, and the concrete prac-
tices that materialise this experience. Keeping this claim in mind, this chapter
argues for a reconsideration of arguments about media customisation, suggesting
that the critiques they raise are relevant but that the mechanism they posit needs
to be revisited. Specifically, it argues that while the notion of a “filter bubble”!® has
captured much of the research attention in the field, additional emphasis needs to
be placed on the conditions available for the formation of a ‘civic disposition’ in
the platform economy.'! The central concern from the perspective of fostering
democratic deliberation is not (only) whether people are exposed to a narrower
range of news and information online (a claim that seems increasingly implausible
in the contemporary media environment), but whether social media undermine
the civic purchase of diverse information streams. In other words, it may be that,
in a context of media surfeit, people find themselves both exposed to a broader
range of information and less inclined to take into consideration the larger com-
munity of which they are part and the perspectives of those unknown others who
comprise it. The point here is not simply that confirmation bias’? might con-
tribute to how people navigate a flood of information, but that a combination of
platform logics and communicative practices with broader social policies under-
mines the background conditions for democratic deliberation. The problem of the
‘filter bubble’? may really be one of the declining efficacy of the conditions that
make deliberation meaningful. If, as Benedict Anderson argued,’* the rise of print
capitalism resulted in media technologies and artefacts that helped people form a
sense of imagined community at the national level, the shift toward platform
media in the era of ‘statist neo-liberalism’’* undoes this achievement. Growing
resistance to countervailing facts and opinions may not be due to echo chamber-
ing, but rather to the degradation of people’s ability to see themselves as part of an

9 — Slavoj Likek, The Ticklish Subject: The Absent Centre of Political Ontology (Verso
1999) 332.

10 Pariser (n 4).

11 Richard Pratte, The Civic Imperative: Examining the Need for Civic Education (Tea-
chers College Press 1988).

12 Pariser (n 4).

13 Benedict Anderson, Imagined Communities: Reflections on the Origin and Spread of
Nationalism (Verso 1983).

14 Littler (n 5).
20 Mark Andrejevie and Zala Volcic

 

imagined community in which the concerns and interests of others, both indivi-
dually and collectively, matter to one’s own thriving and thus to one’s deliberative
decision-making processes. This is a large claim that reaches beyond the limits of a
book chapter, so the goal of this piece is to establish the importance of revisiting
the filter bubble argument by moving beyond its focus on the range of available
content and perspectives. The chapter discerns in pioneering work on the filter
bubble the resources for considering the overarching question of the formation of
a civic disposition and the conditions that threaten it.

The two most influential writers positing a connection between online news and
political fragmentation, Eli Pariser!°and Cass Sunstein, ’© both develop arguments that
have a dual focus: the range of content to which users are exposed and the resulting
shift in civic dispositions. However, it tends to be the content side of the argument
that gets the most attention in recent research, perhaps because of the keywords with
which their work is associated: ‘The Daily Me’ (Sunstein, borrowing from Negro-
ponte) and the ‘Filter Bubble’ (Pariser’s term) both refer to the automated tailoring of
content to particular users. As Sunstein puts it in his first book on the topic

[T]here are serious dangers in a system in which individuals bypass general
interest intermediaries [mass circulation newspapers and electronic mass media |
and restrict themselves to opinions and topics of their own choosing [...] A
situation of this kind is likely to produce far worse than mere fragmentation.'”

Pariser uses Sunstein’s book as a jumping-off point for his own exploration of
online filtering, coming to much the same conclusion: “Together, these engines
create a unique universe of information for each of us —- what P’ve come to call a
filter bubble — which fundamentally alters the way we encounter ideas and infor-
mation’.’® He notes the inevitability of filtering in an increasingly saturated infor-
mation environment, while also critiquing its tendency toward individualisation:
‘Left to their own devices, personalization filters serve up a kind of invisible
autopropaganda, indoctrinating us with our own ideas.’’” The concerns here have
to do with a shifting information environment in which the broadening of avail-
able information coincides with increasing information nichification.

Il. Finding filter bubbles

One result of this argument, which has regained attention in the wake of recent
events, has been a spate of research seeking to empirically verify the existence of
‘filter bubbles’ - customised information environments that reflect a narrowing of
perspectives despite the proliferation of online content. However, the empirical

15 Pariser (n 4).

16 Cass Sunstein, Repudlic.com (Princeton University Press 2001).
17 Ibid 16.

18 Pariser (n 4) 12.

19 Ibid 13.
From mass to automated media 21

 

evidence in this regard remains contested. Fletcher and Nielsen draw on the
Reuters Institute Digital News Report to argue that, ‘[c]ontrary to conventional
wisdom, our analysis shows that social media use is clearly associated with inci-
dental exposure to additional sources of news that people otherwise wouldn’t
use — and with more politically diverse news diets’.*° Similarly, Flaxman and col-
leagues found that the use of social media and search engines is ‘associated with an
increase in an individual’s exposure to material from his or her less preferred side
of the political spectrum’.?’ Alternatively, a review essay by Borgesius and collea-
gues concludes that, ‘at present, there is no empirical evidence that warrants any
strong worries about filter bubbles’.??

In the era of high-volume social media sharing, it seems increasingly plausible
that those who spend more time online are likely to encounter diverse perspec-
tives — even if these are simply shared in the form of critique or indignation. Wired
magazine reported, for example, that those who most strenuously critiqued con-
spiracy theories about school shootings in the United States contributed to their
prominence on social networking platforms since ‘people outraged by the con-
spiracy helped to promote it — in some cases far more than the promoters of the
story’.? The communicative economy of outrage and sensationalism that char-
acterises so much of the online information helps circulate a broad range of per-
spectives — if only to allow people to critique and deride those with whom they
disagree.

The focus on content that characterises the recent reception of the filter bubble
argument gives rise to the assumption that exposure to a broader range of per-
spectives could ameliorate the problem of fragmentation and polarisation. How-
ever, even if the evidence regarding the extent of ‘autopropaganda’ remains in
dispute, the evidence of increasing polarisation is less controversial. A large-scale
survey by the Pew Research Center found that, by a number of measures, the level
of political polarisation in the United States has increased dramatically in the pre-
vious two decades.** According to these findings, the number of Americans who

20 Richard Fletcher and Rasmus K. Nielsen, ‘Using social media appears to diversify your
news diet, not narrow it? NiemanLab (21 June 2017) www.niemanlab.org/2017/
06 /using-social-media-appears-to-diversify-your-news-diet-not-narrow-it/comm
ent-page-1, accessed 30 August 2019.

21 Seth Flaxman, Sharad Goel and Justin M Rao, ‘Filter Bubbles, Echo Chambers, and
Online New Consumption’ (2016) 18(S1) Public Opinion Quarterly, 298, 303.

22 Frederik J Zuiderveen Borgesius et al., ‘Should we worry about filter bubbles?’ (2016)
5(1) Internet Policy Review DOI: 10.14763/2016.1.401.

23 Molly McKew, ‘How liberals amped up a Parkland shooting conspiracy theory’
WIRED (27 February 2018) www.wired.com/story /how-liberals-amped-up-a-parkla
nd-shooting-conspiracy-theory, accessed 30 August 2019.

24 Pew Research Center, Political Polarization in the American Public: How Increasing
Ideological Uniformity and Partisan Antipathy Affect Politics, Compromise and Epery-
day Life (Pew Research Center, 12 June 2014) http://assets.pewresearch.org/wp
-content/uploads /sites/5 /2014/06/6-12-2014-Political-Polarization-Release pdf,
accessed 30 August 2019.
22 Mark Andrejevie and Zala Volcic

 

expressed consistently conservative or consistently liberal views doubled - that is,
people seemed to be more ‘dug into’ a partisan political perspective. At the same
time, Pew researchers reported:

Partisan animosity has increased substantially. [...] In each party, the share
with a highly negative view of the opposing party has more than doubled
since 1994. Most of these intense partisans believe the opposing party’s poli-

cies ‘are so misguided that they threaten the nation’s well-being’.?°

Although levels of polarisation vary internationally, the Reuters Institute has dis-
covered growing perceptions of media bias and increasing political polarisation in
the countries it surveyed: ‘People cluster to media organisations that fit their
belief, and dismiss other outlets. The internet, once thought to open the world up
to all the information possible and bring people together, has instead drawn
people into their own corners.’*° A variety of other factors come into play in dis-
cussions of political polarisation, including media deregulation and levels of eco-
nomic inequality; however, the media remain an important realm in which these
tensions are played out.”

IV. Beyond content

Further consideration of the filter bubble arguments provides resources for con-
sidering the ways in which increased exposure to diverse content might coincide
with increasing political polarisation. Attempts to verify the existence of filter
bubbles shift attention away from ancillary concerns raised by both Pariser and
Sunstein about shifting civic dispositions, because the latter are viewed simply as a
consequence of the former. However, their work provides some openings for
considering the possibility that content alone is not the issue. Indeed, there are
openings in their arguments for approaching the question of how even greater
exposure to a range of perspectives might coincide with increasing, political polar-
isation. Both authors supplement their concerns about customisation with criti-
cism of the impact that media have on the disposition of users. For Sunstein, the
operative distinction is between what he describes as ‘consumer sovereignty’ and
‘political sovereignty’.2* The former prioritises individual tastes and defines free-
dom as their expression within the constraints set by the price system (and avail-
able resources). From the perspective of consumer sovereignty, consuming the
news is indistinguishable from shopping for clothes or cars. Political sovereignty,

25 Ibid.

26 Nic Newman et al., Reuters Institute Digital News Report 2017 (Reuters Institute for
the Study of Journalism, 2017) 30 https://reutersinstitute.politics.ox.ac.uk/sites/
default/files /Digital%20News%20 Report%202017%20web_0.pdf, accessed 30 August
2019.

27 Ibid.

28 Sunstein (n 16) 86.
From mass to automated media 23

 

by contrast, ‘does not take individual tastes as fixed or given. It prizes democratic
selfgovernment, understood as a requirement of “government by discussion,”
accompanied by reason-giving in the public domain’.?? In other words, political
sovereignty requires the practices of recognition that make it possible to form
preferences in discussion with others, taking into consideration their perspectives
and claims. It relies on the recognition that the conditions for the formation of
individual tastes rely on underlying forms of sociality and community that enable a
perceived commonality of interests.

Similarly, Pariser argues that filter bubbles collapse citizenship into consumerist
individualism: ‘The filter bubble [...] creates the impression that our narrow self
interest is all that exists. And while this is great for getting people to shop online, it’s
not great for getting people to make better decisions together.”*° Beyond his concern
with a potential narrowing of the range of content, Pariser is targeting the ways in
which automated curation helps erode the social foundation upon which meaningful
deliberation relies: ‘Personalization has given us something very different: a public
sphere sorted and manipulated by algorithms, fragmented by design, and hostile to
dialogue.’*! At the same time, Pariser’s concern over the fate of the public and the
social suggests the possibility that recalibrating algorithms for serendipity and breadth
may not, on its own, address the pathologies of fragmentation. As he puts it, the
problem must also be countered by ‘a more humanistic and nuanced sense of iden-
tity, and an active promotion of public issues and cultivation of citizenship’ .*?

Tellingly, in this regard, both Pariser and Sunstein invoke the importance of
what we might describe as a ‘civic disposition’ that recognises the claims and
concerns of others as playing an important role in one’s own political calculus.
Such a disposition is difficult to achieve without the community resources that
allow for the imagined possibility of a shared, public interest. As Pratte puts it, ‘[c]
ivic virtue is not a matter of mere behavior; it is a matter of forming a civic dis-
position, a willingness to act in behalf of the public good while being attentive to
and considerate of the feelings, needs, and attitudes of others’.*? For Habermas,
such a disposition is the result of concrete social practice and conscious forms of
social cultivation. As McCarthy puts it, practical discourse features ‘moral agents
trying to put themselves in each other’s shoes [...] And this must be done pub-
licly; arguments played out in the individual consciousness or in the theoretician’s
mind are no substitute for real discourse.’** Viewed as a concrete social practice,
the formation of such a disposition relies upon materialised practices that foster

29 Ibid 45.

30 Pariser (n 4) 90.
31 Ibid 91.

32 Ibid 127.

33 Pratte (n 11) 308.

34 Thomas McCarthy, Introduction, in Jiirgen Habermas, Moral Consciousness and
Communication Action (Shierry Weber Nicholsen and Christian Lenhardt tr, MIT
Press 1990) 12.
24 Mark Andrejevie and Zala Volcic

 

turn taking, the ability to place oneself in the position of others, and a sense of a
community in common with them.

Pariser and Sunstein closely associate customisation of content with the frag-
mentation of a shared media sphere and thus with the erosion of conditions for
the formation of a civic disposition, which is displaced by abstract conceptions of
primary individualism and the concrete practices of consumerism. Their own
arguments suggest that the core problem is not just a question of information, but
also one of a civic disposition toward that information, in which case we might
consider what factors beyond content are implicated in the erosion of such dis-
positions online (and off). It may be the fact of customisation itself and the con-
crete technologies and practices with which it is associated, rather than the alleged
narrowing, of content, that plays the more decisive role —- accompanied as it is with
broader shifts in the social, cultural, and political environment.

It is nice to imagine that diverse ideas and perspectives, on their own, would
bring into being an openness to considering competing claims and putting one’s
own preconceptions to the test, but history has disproven this over and over. The
development of a civic disposition is an historical achievement that requires the
development of societal and institutional resources and practices. It is an achieve-
ment that can be undone if the reservoir of public commitment and social prac-
tices that impel people toward good faith engagement and public deliberation are
reconfigured. The philosopher J.M. Bernstein highlights the underlying issues in
his discussion of Jiirgen Habermas’s version of communicative reason — a core
attribute of deliberation in the public sphere: ‘The ground for orienting ourselves
toward establishing validity claims through intersubjective recognition is inter-
subjective recognition.’*> Much as we might like them to do so, arguments do not
command recognition on their own. The deeper question at work in critiques of
media fragmentation, then, is the extent to which the rise of customised com-
mercial platforms does more than simply reproduce niche world views (a contested
claim) by helping to reconfigure the practices and dispositions that serve as the
underlying conditions for meaningful public deliberation. One crucial task for
addressing contemporary concerns about the relationship of platform media to
democracy is to identify some starting points for moving the discussion beyond an
overly narrow focus on content customisation. The remainder of this chapter
considers, in turn, the shift from mass to automated media and the dismantling of
imagined community and sociality associated with statist neoliberalism.

V. From mass to automated media

The 20th-century era of mass circulation media represents, for Sunstein, a sig-
nificant if relatively brief historical period that played an important democratic role
at the national level. The mainstream mass media — what he describes as ‘general

35 J M Berstein, Recovering Ethical Life: Jiirgen Habermas and the Future of Critical
Theory (Routledge 1995) 180.
From mass to automated media 25

 

interest intermediaries’*® — provide a mediated sociality that serves as the social
glue that enables shared deliberation. As he puts it, ‘[p]eople who rely on such
intermediaries have a range of chance encounters, involving shared experience
with diverse others and exposure to material that they did not specifically
choose’.?” The emphasis in this formulation, as in much of Sunstein’s writing on
the topic, is, unsurprisingly, on content: a common set of stories contributes to
the formation of shared world views that provide common ground for delibera-
tion. Sunstein compares these media to public spaces in which people encounter
perspectives and viewpoints that differ from their own but that are nevertheless
contained within a shared set of reference points.** The advantage of mass media
is that they can extend this sense of a shared informational space beyond the limits
of physical space: ‘[I]ntermediaries of this sort have large advantages over streets
and parks precisely because they tend to be national, even international. Typically
they expose people to questions and problems in other areas, even other coun-
tries.” Sunstein is moving beyond content in this formulation: he is articulating
the role that the mass media play in forming a sense of what Benedict Anderson
has described as an ‘imagined community’.*° Anderson draws on the example of
one of the first mass production technologies, the commercial printing press, to
explore the relationship between the rise of the concept of the nation state and of
the mass audience for newspapers and novels. The novel, he argues, ushers in the
notion of ‘a sociological organism moving calendrically through homogeneous,
empty time”? — a notion that parallels ‘the idea of the nation’ as a container that
holds together people who will never know each other but who nonetheless are
conceptually assembled into a shared sense of community. As he puts it:

An American will never meet, or even know the names of more than a handful
of his 240,000,000-odd fellow Americans [Anderson was writing 80 million
people ago]. He has no idea of what they are up to at any one time. But he
has complete confidence in their steady, anonymous, simultaneous activity.”

He describes the daily newspaper - Sunstein’s general interest intermediary — as
the basis of a rhythmic ritual of reading that reinforces a sense of community:

The significance of this mass ceremony — Hegel observed that newspapers
serve modern man as a substitute for morning prayers — is paradoxical. It is
performed in silent privacy, in the lair of the skull. Yet each communicant is

36 Sunstein (n 16) 3.

37 Ibid 11.

38 Ibid 12.

39 Cass Sunstein, “The Daily We: Is the Internet really a blessing for democracy’ (2001)
26 Boston Review 3, 6.

40 Benedict Anderson, Imagined Communities (2nd edn, Verso Books 2006).

41 Ibid 26.

42 Ibid.
26 Mark Andrejevie and Zala Volcic

 

well aware that the ceremony he performs is being replicated simultaneously
by thousands (or millions) of others of whose existence he is confident, yet of
whose identity he has not the slightest notion.**

This awareness is a true achievement insofar as it calls into being the sense of a
shared, common, existence with unknown, remote, but imagined others. Dwelling
on the power of this achievement, we might consider the practical and material
components that underwrite a sense of simultaneity as community. The news
comes according to a rhythm — morning edition, late edition, evening edition -
that synchronises reading patterns across space. Readers know the stories they are
reading are simultaneously being consumed by unknown others in their regional
or national sphere. The papers themselves circulate as discrete sharable items
whether in the home or on the commuter train, where a discarded paper might be
retrieved and re-read by many, marking an informational bond between readers.
Mass media homogenise and unify the informational community — a process that
has both its benefits and its pathologies (the latter of which provided the impetus
for undermining the former). Like mass transport, mass media assemble people
into groups and provide them with a collective sense of movement through time.

Anderson’s formulation is suggestive because it highlights the role that media
infrastructures, artefacts, and practices play in providing the imagined community
that contributes to the formation of a civic disposition. As Bernstein suggests,
recognising the claims of unknown others requires that some sense of a shared
community interest must already be in place.** Anderson provides us with some
ways of thinking about the role played by media practices and technologies in
building this sense of community (which is not to say that the media are the sole
contributor, but surely they have an important role to play). The mass reproduc-
tion enabled by the printing press standardised a national language and provided
those who spoke it with shared informational resources. Mass circulation news-
papers helped to build a shared sense of mediated experiences and rituals at the
regional and eventually the national level. People watched the same shows at the
same times (more or less); they read stories about the same issues, and the mass
market gave rise to conventions of objectivity that set the boundaries for what
counted as mainstream perspectives. The subsequent critique of the ‘mainstream’
media was enabled by the fact that there was a palpable mainstream, largely built
around the consensus of political and media elites and those who depended on
these for information and access.** The limitations of mass media meant that there
was an ‘outside’ to the media environment — people were not immersed in the
endless flow of customised information and entertainment that characterises

43 Ibid 35.

44 Bernstein (n 35).

45 See e.g. Robert W. McChesney, The Political Economy of Media: Enduring Issues,
Emerging Dilemmas (NYU Press 2008); Edward S. Herman and Noam Chomsky,
Manufacturing Consent: The Political Economy of the Mass Media (Random House
2010).
From mass to automated media 27

 

always-on media. There is no need to romanticise the era of the general interest
intermediary (from its inception riven by commercial pressures — at least in the
US - and constrained by power and convention), to trace the role it might play in
the formation of an imagined community that could gesture toward something
like a shared public interest.

The rise of the commercial model for information provision online offers some
telling contrasts to the era of the general interest intermediary —- beyond the dif-
ferences in content identified by Sunstein and Pariser. The notion of homogenous
time gives way to mass customisation and the rhythm of media consumption
becomes disaggregated and reconfigured. The evening newscast is replaced, for
many, by the constant flow of customised information. We dig into our own
worlds not simply by drawing on customised content, but by reconfiguring our
spatial and temporal relationships to information, to the world around us, and to
each other. The TV room in the dorm gives way to roommates watching separate
Netflix shows in adjoining rooms on their personal devices. Local newspapers dry
up and blow away, leaving a vacuum to be filled by local Facebook groups created
by, among, others, civilian militias and right-wing hate groups. The rhythm of
reading and viewing is accelerated while the time to absorb and contemplate is
displaced by the relentless flow of updates and information tidbits. The space
‘outside’ of media consumption shrinks as people take their devices into the public
parks and streets, largely oblivious of the strangers around them, focused on their
own personal window on the world unfolding before them. Of course, there are
exceptions and alternatives, but the tendency is clear, and the implications for our
sense of imagined community deserves a central place in any approach to the
relationship between digital media and political fragmentation.

The reluctance of influential platforms such as Facebook and Twitter to view them-
selves as publishers, and thus responsible for the content they circulate, furthers the shift
away from a notion of public — and the goal of serving it — toward that of marketing to
disaggregated consumers. The imperatives of the automated information economy are
shaped by the data-driven advertising models that rely primarily on ‘stickiness’ (the time
spent on a site) and engagement (user content production and information sharing) to
maximise both exposure to ads and data collection about users.*©

One of the leading contemporary critics of the social effects of the device-based plat-
form economy is lapsed cyber-celebrant Sherry Turkle. For Turkle, social media are
fundamentally anti-social technologies insofar as they displace communion onto digital
(and, we might add, commercial) networks. Her book Alone Together laments the def-
icit of sociality wreaked by hyper-connectivity:*” the rise in playground accidents that
coincides with parents and nannies focusing on phones rather than children, the college

46 Paul Lewis, “Fiction is outperforming reality”: how YouTube’s algorithm distorts
truth’, The Guardian (2 February 2018) www.theguardian.com/technology/2018/
feb/02 /how-youtubes-algorithm-distorts-truth, accessed 30 August 2019.

47 Sherry Turkle, Alone Together: Why We Expect More from Technology and Less from
Each Other (3rd edn, Basic Books 2017).
28 Mark Andrejevic and Zala Volcic

 

suitemates texting one another from room to room rather than talking, the loss of the
‘raw, human part’ of being with one another.*® Turkle found that for her respondents,
managing sprawling social media networks can be so time- consuming that people look
for the most efficient ways to communicate: texting rather than talking by phone (which
comes to be seen as too intrusive and an outdated form of ‘mono-tasking’), shorthand
signs of support and affirmation (likes, retweets, posts), asynchronous modes of inter-
acting with friends and families, and so on. As Turkle puts it:

[T]oday our machine dream is to be never alone but always in control. This

can’t happen when one is face-to-face with a person. But it can be accom-
plished with a robot, or by slipping through the portals of a digital life.*”

One related recent development is the accelerating tendency to offload sociality
onto increasingly automated platforms. A platform called Molly, for example,
profiles users in order to craft automated answers to questions from other. As one
press account put it:

Eventually [...] it will provide answers that are not already in its system using,
machine learning. By using all the information the app can gather about you
(upon creating a profile, you have the option to add social accounts from
which Molly can learn), it will be able to predict an answer to a question
relevant to you. Molly would confirm its formulated answer with you — to

affirm yes, that’s what you would say — and whoever asked the query will be

sent an answer. 50

Instead of communicating directly with an interlocutor, users interact with the bot
that becomes their always-on networked presence. As the demands of constant

48 Catherine de Lang, ‘Sherry Turkle: “We’re losing the raw, human part of being with each
other”’ The Guardian (5 May 2013) www.theguardian.com/science/2013/may/05/ra
tional-heroes-sherry-turkle-mit, accessed 30 August 2019. Some recent empirical
research (Jeffrey A Hall, Michael W Kearney and Chong Xing, “Two tests of social dis-
placement through social media use’ (2018) 22 Information, Communication & Society
1396) has pressed against the ‘social displacement via social media’ hypothesis, finding no
support for the assumption that ‘social media decreases interactions with close friends and
family’ (12). Although the authors cite Turkle’s work as an example of the social dis-
placement hypothesis, her findings focus not on the frequency of contact but on the
rhythm and character of social interaction. Parents and children may, for example, have
face-to-face contact even while their attention and focus is directed toward their devices.
From the perspective of Sunstein’s concerns, the question is not whether interactions
with close friends and family are displaced, but whether public encounters are diminished
through the privatisation of public space associated with mobile, networked devices. See
more in Jeffrey A Hall et al., ibid.

49 Turkle (n 47) 157.

50 Molly McKew, ‘Our Bots, Ourselves’ The Ringer (7 March 2018) www.theringer.
com /tech/2018/3/7 /17089364/molly-machine-learning-social-platform-bots,
accessed 30 August 2019.
From mass to automated media 29

 

connectivity pile up, automation becomes the ready response. Google is develop-
ing an Al-based automatic reply system for text messages that will allow users to
eyeball its suggested response and send it off with a single tap. As the developers
describe it, the system would incorporate context awareness derived from other
social media apps and platforms: ‘The system can apparently work out what people
are saying to you and suggest one-tap answers, but Google says it will go further,
taking your location, your calendar and other bits of information into account.”*!
Through the dialectical reversal enacted by automation, the acceleration of soci-
ality culminates in its elimination via automation: the convergence of hyper-inter-
activity with solipsism.

VI. Neoliberal sociality

Media practices do not exist in a vacuum and the tendencies described by Turkle,
Sunstein, and Pariser parallel broader claims about the resources for sociality under
conditions of what Wendy Brown has described as ‘statist neoliberalism’.°? The
triumph of ‘consumer sovereignty’, combined with technologies and practices that
foster increasingly individualistic forms of media consumption and solipsistic social
interaction described by Turkle, align themselves with the regulatory assault on
notions of a public interest and policies that support social security and collective
benefits. Brown argues that the political climate in the Trump era promotes a
regulatory approach that

literally takes apart social bonds and social welfare — not simply by promoting
a libertarian notion of freedom and dismantling the welfare state, but also by
reducing, legitimate political claims only to those advanced by and for families
and individuals, not social groups generated by social powers.°?

The list of policy changes and proposals that fit this description continues to grow:
the attempts to undermine the Affordable Care Act in the US, to dismantle
environmental regulation, to de-fund public service media and publicly funded
research, to cut low-cost health care for poor children and cross-subsidies for
broadband access, are just a few.

What the programmes and policies under attack have in common is that they
reflect a commitment to forms of mutual recognition and the sense of common,
shared public interest. This commitment reflects and reproduces a crucial compo-
nent of democratic culture, according to Brown: ‘The saturation of the state,
political culture, and the social with market rationality effectively strips

51 Hal 90210, ‘Tired of texting? Google tests robot to chat with friends for you’ The
Guardian (14 February 2018) www.theguardian.com/technology/2018/feb/14/
google-tests-robot-chat-reply-friends, accessed 30 August 2019.

52 Littler (n 5).

53 Ibid 14.
30 Mark Andrejevie and Zala Volcic

 

commitments to political democracy from governance concerns and political cul-
ture.°* Cayley Sorochan, in her related discussion of the fate of participation in
the neoliberal era, observes:

It is not simply that the political sphere has minimized its purview or become
corrupted by capitalist interests, it is that the possibility of understanding the
political as a distinct dimension of human life with its own logic and set of

values is disappearing or made unintelligible by the ubiquity of economistic
thinking.*>

At issue in such accounts is the diminished or disappearing space for forms of
political interaction that are irreducible to the economic - and thus of subject
positions distinct from the individual preferences and structured competition pri-
vileged by the market.

This wide-ranging reconfiguration of the societal landscape emerges from and
reproduces a suppression of the underlying forms of trust and recognition that enable
the functioning of social and political life. The subject position that celebrates tax cuts
paid for by the dismantling of health care for the poor refuses any conception of a
common interest that foregrounds social interdependence. The emphasis on indivi-
dual self-interest suppresses and misrecognises the underlying social bonds that make
the market society it relies on able to function in the first place. The threat of this
form of extreme misrecognition — the taxpayer screaming over the use of public
money for public services that benefit others — is that we become less conscious of the
underlying forms of trust that make possible even the most basic of activities in con-
temporary society, from vouchsafing our children to the public schools to crossing
the street when the light turns red (it is certainly a symptom of contemporary social
pathologies that both of these realms of trust have become highly publicised vectors
of attack and vulnerability). In myriad ongoing ways, we rely on forms of trust and
recognition that are all too easily ignored, overlooked, and disavowed in favour of an
abstract notion of individuality that would be impossible to sustain without both
these forms of sociality and their disavowal. The assault on public institutions ranging
from public education to public parks and libraries to public health care provide evi-
dence of the social amnesia upon which the forms of neoliberal governance described
by Brown thrives. As the philosopher J.M. Bernstein puts it: “The American version
of these practices has, from the earliest days of the republic, made individuality auto-
chthonous while suppressing to the point of disappearance the manifold ways that
individuality is beholden to a complex and uniquely modern form of life.”°°

54 Wendy Brown, ‘American Nightmare: Neoliberalism, Neoconservatism, and De-
Democratization’ (2006) 34(6) Political Theory 690, 695.

55 Cayley Sorochan, The Participatory Complex: Participation as Ideolagy in the Neo-
liberal Eva (PhD thesis, McGill University 2017) 36.

56 J M Bernstein, ‘The Very Angry Tea Party’ The New York Times (13 June 2010) http
s://opinionator.blogs.nytimes.com/2010/06/13/the-very-angry-tea-party, accessed
30 August 2019.
From mass to automated media 31

 

Against this background, it comes as no surprise that the frustration of the
current political moment has to do with people’s inability to reach across political
and ideological divides to agree upon underlying facts, evidence, and reality. The
shift toward automated, customised media works in both form and content to
reinforce a conception of consumerist individualism that disavows the background
practices, institutions, and social relations that serve as its own conditions of pos-
sibility. Thus, the questions we should be asking of social media and the platform
economy have to do not just with the diversity of content they provide, but also
with the ways in which it structures and reinforces this version of solipsism. These
influences are not limited to the messages we receive, but to the ways in which we
encounter them.

If the underlying resources for meaningful deliberation — the ground that makes
it possible for people to hear the concerns and arguments of others — are eroded, it
is not clear that technical or educational fixes, as important as they might be, are
sufficient. Instead, it becomes important to reconfigure the practices, platforms,
and policies that reinforce an understanding of news and information as indivi-
dualised, custom-tailored commodities, dismantling the sense of publicness, com-
monality of interest, and mutual recognition that underwrite democratic
deliberation. The stakes are high because of the role deliberation plays in demo-
cratic self-governance — that is, in providing an alternative to the role of violence in
resolving disagreements. As Simone Chambers put it in her work on deliberative
democracy, political deliberation is predicated, in part, on ‘the intuition that talk-
ing is better than fighting’.>” If the resources available for talking dissipate, we run
the danger of finding ourselves in a post-deliberative, post-diplomatic realm in
which the play of force and violence is unleashed.

VII. The glut chamber

The insight resulting from such arguments is that diversity of media content and
perspectives is an outmoded proxy for meaningful deliberation. Neither Sunstein>®
nor Pariser®’ celebrates diversity simply for diversity’s sake: they both see the
breadth of media exposure as a necessary precondition for functional public
deliberation. That is, even if those who lament the rise of online echo chambers
are empirically wrong about the breadth of perspectives to which people are
exposed, this does not mean we no longer have to worry about the state of con-
temporary political deliberation. It seems increasingly possible that the most
important change is not in the breadth of content, but in its efficacy. This is the
paradox of the contemporary information environment: that, under certain

57 Simone Chambers, Reasonable Democracy: firgen Habermas and the Politics of Dis-
course (Cornell University Press 1996) 2.

58 Cass Sunstein, #Republic: Divided Democracy in the Age of Social Media (Princeton
University Press 2017); Cass Sunstein, Repudblic.com 2.0 (Princeton University Press
2007); Sunstein (n 16).

59 Pariser (n 4).
32 Mark Andrejevie and Zala Volcic

 

circumstances, a breath-taking expansion of the information environment might
exacerbate (rather than overcome) political polarisation. Such an observation is
perhaps less surprising than it might at first seem: when there are myriad conflicting
accounts and perspectives, people experience greater latitude in choosing among
them. In a world of proliferating media outlets, wherein even the most extreme
perspectives can readily find themselves reinforced by a range of media sources and
resources (as well as by a ready core of like-minded supporters), it is easier to feel
that one has not only the right but the obligation to choose one’s own facts. In an
environment of media surfeit, one is cast adrift on a sea of narratives and counter-
narratives, equipped only with the pole star of pre-existing preconceptions and pre-
judices. In the digital information environment, every account can be undermined
and contested, every representation deconstructed, every proof counterfeited, every
theory transformed into a conspiracy and vice versa.

But perhaps glut, on its own, is not enough to explain this vertiginous dis-
mantling of symbolic efficiency. Isn’t the whole point of evidence and reasoned
argument that it can cut through the clutter of falsehood, superstition, and wrong
opinion? The reality of public debate on a national scale is that it draws heavily on
media representations and thus relies on some level of fundamental trust in the
systems of expertise, accountability, and responsibility meant to serve as guarantors
of these representations. Functional debate also relies on what might be described
as good faith engagement in processes of reasoned, consistent argumentation and
the ability to step outside of one’s own perspective to consider that of others —
that is, some degree of generalisability. The commercial platform model poses
profound challenges to both of these underlying preconditions, which suggests the
importance of a fundamental rethinking and reconfiguration of this model. All of
which is not to say that these challenges are unique to social media, which in many
ways extend the logics of hyper-commercialisation and nichification that char-
acterised the development of the mass media in the late 20th century.

The truth of the ‘democratising’? promise of social media, then, is that it
reconfigures the citizen as both consumer (and thus as an individualised target)
and brand (tasked with self-marketing and self-broadcasting).°! Simultaneously, it
displaces practices of human sociality with automated sorting systems running on
commercial platforms. Offloading our interactions onto bots allows us to suppress
the recognition of our interdependence, our reliance on others. Hyper-con-
nectivity, on this account, defaults to a form of hermetic solipsism that looks
increasingly familiar in the era of the decline of symbolic efficiency.®? The new
challenge for democratic deliberation becomes not that of providing evidence and
countervailing narratives and viewpoints, but of securing recognition for the

60 Mark Andrejevic, Infoglut: How Too Much Information Is Changing the Way We
Think and Know (Routledge 2013).

61 Alison Hearn, ‘““Meat, Mask, Burden”: Probing the contours of the branded “self”’
(2008) 8(2) Journal of Consumer Culture 197.

62 Zizek (n 9).
From mass to automated media 33

 

underlying forms of interdependence that make it possible to take on the per-
spective and position of others — and to invite them to do the same for us.

In the automated, mass customised media environment, perhaps the real chal-
lenge to democratic deliberation is not the narrowing of content and perspectives
available on social media platforms, but the combination of their indefinite pro-
liferation with the erosion of the social preconditions for adjudicating between
them. If, in the filter bubble, people are deafened to the views of others by the
constant reinforcement of their preconceptions and prejudices, in a context of
“nfoglut’,®? the cacophony is equally deafening. The pressing question becomes
how to cultivate the resources that would calm this cacophony by facilitating the
shared adjudication of mutually exclusive arguments and perspectives. If recog-
nising, the validity claims of others depends in turn on underlying forms of inter-
subjective recognition that are eroded by the rise of automated sociality (and the
assault on practices and institutions that provide a sense of shared political and
social commitment), we cannot expect the claims of whatever passes as reasoned
deliberation to retain purchase on their own. We need to imagine alternatives to
offloading, sociality onto commercial automated networks that render hyper-com-
municativity ineffective for actual deliberation (listening, perspective taking, and
recognition of mutuality and shared interdependency). Failing to do so would be
to concede that talking no longer provides a viable alternative to fighting, rele-
gating information to the ongoing process of weaponisation that is colonising
contemporary social relations.

63 Andrejevic (n 60).
