Social Communication| 45
Volume 2 (2019), pp. 45-52

$ sciendo DOI: 10.2478/sc-2019-0008

HOW FACEBOOK POLARIZES
PUBLIC DEBATE IN POLAND -
POLISH FILTER BUBBLE

Zofia Sawicka!

 

Abstract

The dissemination of the media has led to the phenomenon of the mediatization of social re-
ality, which in the era of new media has become dominant, because the new media have infiltrated
almost every aspect of human functioning. The surprising paradox of the new media is the fact that
on the one hand they give access to almost unlimited information, on the other hand they narrow it
down extremely. The modern media user, often without realizing it, “uses” only the information that
is offered to him by specially selected internet algorithms. Created in this way the so-called “informa-
tion/filter bubble” condemns him to the only vision of reality - and in the absence of the possibility of
verifying his observations what results from the way the new media works - in his opinion the only
true one. This is particularly important in creating the vision of social order and the functioning of
the state. The mediatisation of Polish social reality - especially in the context of social media - led to
the emergence of polarized groups isolated from each other and caused a lack of rational political
debate on a number of important social issues.

Keywords: Facebook, filter bubble, narcissism, public debate, Polish public opinion

 

INTRODUCTION

Both the new and the traditional media are nowadays an extremely important el-
ement of human life and an integral part of culture. As a means of communication, as
well as a source of behavioral patterns, they have significantly changed the functioning
of societies. The number of data in the world is growing very fast. Every year, we produce
more data than during the past few years of our history. The access to information is
nowadays no longer a problem, the more difficult issue, in the current information over-
load, the more its skillful finding. Walter Lipmann already argued in his theory from 1921
that people are unable to the perception of surrounding them extremely complex and
complicated reality, which is why in their minds simplified models of the external world
are created. Lipmann called it “images in heads”, and argued that the dominant role in
their creation belongs to the press [Pyzikowska, 2001, p. 75]. According to Lipmann,
information media create cognitive maps of the world, to which the recipients react,
cutting off from the reality that is too complicated for the human mind. In this way the
mediatization of social reality is created, which, according to Walery Pisarek, is a process

1 Zofla Sawicka- PhD in College of Media and Social Cornmunication at University of |n-
formation Technology and Management in Rzeszéw, contact zsawicka@wsiz.rzeszow.pl, ORCID:
0000-0001-7679-5303
46

of media mediation in exploring the world, influencing the media perception of phenom-
ena inaccessible to direct experience, shaping the image of the entire social reality, and
even comprehensive social experiences under the influence of media structures [Pis-
arek, 2006, p. 116].

The influence of the media on shaping public opinion is investigated by the theory
of agenda setting, which, despite being created over 40 years ago, has not lost its rele-
vance. According to this theory, media messages have a huge impact on public opinion,
because they determine the information order of the day, deciding about the existence
of selected messages in the consciousness of their recipients [McCombes & Shaw &
Weaver, 2014]. What is more, the media, through the framing function, give their own
interpretation to the presented content. In this way, the media not only tell their users
what to think about, but also how to interpret the provided information [Nowak, Reidel,
2008, p.180].

In the era of the new media, the phenomenon of mediatization has become even
more visible, because the new media have penetrated almost every aspect of human life.
In the light of conducted research on the impact of the media (both traditional and new)
on public opinion, it seems that thanks to online media and social media, the agenda-set-
ting power of the media has been strengthened. The new media give more possibilities
to identify and associate issues and their attributes corresponding to the preferences of
the recipient [Nowak, 2016]. In this way, the surprising paradox of the new media starts
to be visible. The new media on the one hand give access to almost unlimited informa-
tion, on the other they extremely narrow it. The modern media user, often without real-
izing it, “uses” only the information that is offered to him by specially selected internet
algorithms. This phenomenon is clearly visible on one of the most popular social media,
i.e. on Facebook.

The following article aims to explain how Facebook polarizes public debate in Po-
land. The presented conclusions are based on the critical analysis of the discourse of
Polish media including social media, mainly Facebook, observations and interviews with
Polish students who belong to the generation of digital natives and on the assumptions
of intercultural psychology and communication.

DIGITAL NATIVES AND FACEBOOK

Today’s social media have become an undoubted rival of the press or other tradi-
tional media in fulfilling the informational function about the world events. This compe-
tition is definitely won among the generation of digital natives, for whom social media
become the basic source of knowledge about the world. At the end of 2018, over 2 billion
users used Facebook worldwide. Among them, the largest group were people aged 18
to 34 [Kuchta, 2019]. Digital natives are- generally speaking- people who were born in the
times of widespread use in the everyday and professional life of the Internet, computers
and other devices, treating the Internet as an ordinary element of the world around them.
Growing up in the world of new technologies has significantly changed their patterns of
communication, processing and consumption of information [Prensky, 2001]. One of the
distinguishing features of this generation is narcissism, which in this case is not only
about focusing on the physical image (e.g. placing countless selfies on the web), but
also on the media consumption model. According to research conducted by Pew Re-
search Center, Facebook users (the vast majority of whom belong to the digital natives’
generation, about 70% of them have accounts on this social network [Statista, 2019])
are looking for information that confirms the validity and the importance of their views.
Moreover, they are not willing to speak in the discussion if they are convinced that others
do not share their opinions [Anderson, Camount, 2014]. This is how the phenomenon of
the egocasting is created, which consists in focusing only on content identical to indi-
vidual interests, and omitting information with which he disagrees [Rosen, 2004/2005,
pp. 51-72]. This leads to a situation in which the individual begins to live in a world of
their own beliefs without the possibility of their confrontation or verification. The rules of
Facebook functioning significantly strengthen this mechanism.

FACEBOOK AND FILTER BUBBLE

Although Facebook is the most popular social medium, according to Pew Research
Center research, as many as % of all users do not know how it works. In this way, the
mechanism of personalization the content escapes the attention of users and without
their knowledge encloses them in an information bubble [Hiltin, Rainie, 2019].

Every Facebook user, after logging in to the website, notices the so-called newsfeed
or wall on which he can see the latest activities of his friends. Their activity is so-called
edge. According to the simulation, with having several hundred friends on an account on
Facebook, with every login in to the site should appear about 1,500 new edges. In this
way the user would be overwhelmed with the number of new information. To facilitate
his task, Facebook has created content filtering algorithms that are designed to predict
what will interest a given user. The algorithm calculates possible interests based on the
user’s previous behavior on the website and decides which content will be displayed and
which is not, in this way the new phenomenon occurs, in which the information finds the
user and not vice versa [Malinowski, 2016].

The first person paying attention to this mechanism was Eli Pariser, an American In-
ternet activist. During his speech at the TED conference in 2011, he used for the first time
the term filter bubble, which he defined as “a personal and unique information universe
in which we all live online.” He reached this conclusion by observing his own Facebook
wall, when after clicking on links shared by liberal views friends, he stopped noticing
content posted by his more conservative friends. The algorithm of Facebook based on
his activity on the portal limited the content that Pariser would consider to be polarizing
with his views [Pariser, 2011].

Pariser’s remarks were confirmed by Matt Honan from the “Wired” magazine, who
liked every activity of his friends that appeared on his wall. “Bemused” in this way the
algorithm stopped displaying content shared by other users, showing only information
from brands, which also showed to his friends [Honan, 2014].

Pariser’s observations on the principles of Facebook's operation show the power
of this medium in creating and strengthening the narcissistic attitudes of its users who
locked in their own filter bubbles, have access to information in accordance with their
preferences and likings. In this way, they are cut off from everything that the algorithm
deems “unworthy” of their interests and freed from the content confronting their views
on reality. Thanks to this mechanism, they gain the belief that their point of view is cor-
rect and all those who think differently must be wrong.

It is worth noting that the algorithms activity does not only cover the interests of
Facebook users, although it also in this case deprives them of the possibility of changes.
Based on their previous choices, the algorithms offer them similar content, not consider-
ing that the taste of each can change. Algorithms also personalize the news that reaches
users closing each of them in a separate bubble. Access to other users is conditioned by
the convergence of opinions, views or needs. In this way, public discourse is disturbed.

FACEBOOK AND PUBLIC OPINION

In the world of the new media, the role of a gatekeeper, so far performed by media
broadcasters or opinion leaders, has been taken over by algorithms what significantly
influenced the shape of modern public opinion. The selection of information, devoid of a
human factor, sorts them only according to the rules of importance for the user, not con-
sidering what is really important and what is less important for the general public. That
leads to the situation where the user sees only the content with which he agrees and
comes to the conviction that everyone thinks in the same way. If he meets a person with

47
48

different views, he is convinced that this person must be wrong. Isolating users from
content that collides with their points of view leads to the creation of “digital ghettos”
whose “residents” reinforce each other's beliefs in the validity and importance of their
views and consume only information that confirms their opinions [Szpunar, 2018]. At the
same time, they are still convinced about choosing independently the content to which
they have access. This illusion is further amplified by the confirmation bias our brain is
subject to, i.e. the tendency to choose and prefer sources consistent with our worldview
[Kahneman, Tversky, 1979]. Thanks to this, we protect ourselves and the conviction that
we are right. These opinions and views are strengthened by spreading them through
repeated and continuous communication between users who share the same type of
thoughts in a closed system, i.e. on social networks. In this way, the echo chamber is
created, which in turn leads to the rejection of alternative views and, consequently, to the
strengthening of one’s own [Jamieson, Apella, 2010]. This situation is extremely conve-
nient for the individual, because he is not forced to confront the content with which he
does not agree. What is more, his belief that the world is homogeneous grows, because
any form of difference is not allowed to his consciousness, which results in the radical-
ization of his views. This attitude leads to a state in which users close themselves to
an alternative vision of the world, and any confrontation remains only in the declarative
sphere [Szpunar 2018]. This situation has a huge impact on public opinion, because it
significantly limits public debate, favoring the radicalization and polarization of opposing
views. If we add the phenomenon of narcissism to this, then a debate with people with
different views than ours will not be possible at all. This way of shaping public opinion
is of particular importance in the generation of digital natives, because mainly among
them the role of the information medium has been taken over by Facebook. It is also
important for those who do not belong to this generation, but who also use social me-
dia. Since people are looking for information consistent with their beliefs, they will use
those traditional media that share their opinion, Facebook’s algorithms will additionally
confirm it. In this way, by using various sources of information, they will “concrete” in
their own views.

What was one of the promises of the Internet- the creation of a public sphere that
would foster debate and create a consensus, turned out to be not entirely true. The sur-
prising paradox of the new media is the fact that on the one hand they give access
to almost unlimited information, on the other hand they narrow it down extremely. The
modern media user, often without realizing it, “uses” only the information that is offered
to him by specially selected internet algorithms. Created in this way filter bubble con-
demns him to the only vision of reality - and in the absence of the possibility of verifying
his observations what results from the way the new media works - in his opinion the
only true one. This is particularly important in creating the vision of social order and the
functioning of the state which is well illustrated by the example of Polish society and its
division into “two” functioning parallel Poland. The mediatization of Polish social reality
has led to the emergence of isolated groups, whose members - mainly through media
activities - have limited opportunities to make choices and make independent decisions.
It also caused a lack of rational political debate on a number of important social issues.

POLISH FILTER BUBBLE

Facebook in Poland is one of the most popular social networking sites. At the end
of 2018, 16,840,000 Poles used it, which accounted for 44.3% of the total population.
Their age range was as follows:

7.6% between the ages of 13 and 17 years
22% between the ages of 18 and 24 years
29,1% between the ages of 25 and 34 years
20,8% between the ages of 35 and 44 years
10,2% between the ages of 45 and 54 years
6,4% between the ages 55 and 64 years [Gérska, 2018]

So, itis clearly seen that the generation of digital natives most often uses Facebook,
this is particularly important in the face of the fact that for 61% of all users of this me-
dium Facebook is the basic source of news about the events in Poland and in the world
[Statista, 2019]. If we compare these data with another survey, it turns out that for older
Poles (60 years and older) the main source of knowledge is television (90%), while Face-
book in the 18-29 age group is a source of information for 58% of them. The press as a
source of the news is in this group in the reverse [Kolanko, 2019].

The situation that emerges from the results of the research presented above has a
significant impact on the shape of public debate in Poland. Since Facebook encloses its
users in filter bubbles, it means that over 60% of Poles using this medium do not have
reliable knowledge about events in Poland and in the world. They are receiving person-
alized information, which on the one hand is very convenient for them, but on the other,
from the point of view of social communication and building a public debate, this fact
has disastrous consequences. Each of them lives closed in their information bubble
and according to it assesses reality. If we assume (and this is confirmed by the author's
observations) that the Internet, or more precisely Facebook is the only source of infor-
mation for young Poles, they have no way of verifying their views, which in turn leads to
radicalization of their opinions. Also, those who use television as the main source of in-
formation are not free from the filter bubble effect. With the current polarization of news
sites in Poland, viewers of individual TV stations or readers of specific titles of weekly
opinions will not get a chance to confront their views on the web. The algorithm will pre-
pare information for them that will only confirm their views. In this way, there is a huge
polarization and radicalization of public debate in Poland, in which there are no rational
arguments on important social issues.

Politicians also are not free from the filter bubble effect. This is significant because
they have a decisive influence on the shape of the public debate and what issues are
raised in it. Since politicians have specific views and use social media, it can be assumed
that information that does not coincide with their beliefs never reaches them. It can be
seen from specific examples, such as during the interview of Rafat Trzaskowski, who
was the minister of foreign affairs in the shadow cabinet of Civic Platform. Asked by
Konrad Piasecki, the journalist of Radio Zet, he could not answer the question related
to the dispute about the Smolensk Monument in New Jersey, despite the fact that this
topic was dominant in social media for three days, his filter bubble did not contain this
message [Piasecki, 2018]. Probably the algorithm treated this information as related
with Law and Justice party what was automatically classified as not corresponding with
Trzaskowski’s opinion. Another example is the Polish migration policy project, which
addresses issues related to refugees or Muslim migrants. This problem was discussed
very strongly in public debate. The word “Islam” appears 47 times in the document and
always in the context of security threats, terrorism and fundamentalism. Almost the en-
tire subsection entitled “Ensuring security in the migration process” (over 12 pages) is
devoted to the alleged threat from Islam. No other religious group is singled out in the
policy draft in such a way. All Muslims are racialized and portrayed as non-integrated
radicals, and if not present, future terrorists. There is no mention of the diversity of Islam
and Muslim societies. The authors cite an article from the Catholic far-right website /
bimonthly Polonia Christian, which was at the forefront of racism and stigmatization of
Muslims in Poland, as well as information from the TVP Info news portal, which present-
ed information in a similar tone about Muslims and refugees [Pedziwiatr, 2019]. The au-
thors of the document (they were not undisclosed to the public opinion) connected with
the ruling party, when created this draft, used sources of information available to them,
limited by their own filter bubbles. They presented their image of Muslims, convinced
of the correctness of their own views. In this way, the debate about such an important

49
50

problem for Poland as the problem of migration is polarized and extremely radicalized.

The filter bubble effect in the Polish public debate seems to be strengthened by the
Polish national character, which, according to the author, perfectly fits into the activities
of social media algorithms. Pawet Boski, a precursor of intercultural psychology, distin-
guishes among characteristics of Poles: the lack of social discipline, low level of social
trust and sarmatism, which is inseparably connected with the conviction of being unique
and always right [Boski, 2009]. Moreover, the tradition of the Polish public debate are the
parliaments and councils, which were often dominated by excessive talkativeness, quar-
rels and disputes that resulted from the noble pettifogging characteristic for Poles also
nowadays. Julian Ochorowicz, a nineteenth-century Polish philosopher, psychologist
and publicist, also attributed to the Polish nation partisanship saying that when three
Germans gather, they form a union, and three Poles form four parties [Lewandowski,
2007].

All of the above-mentioned features are easily reinforced by the nature of social
media. Filter bubble divides the Polish Internet community into groups that cannot talk
to each other. Social media are conducive to “excessive talkativeness” and, as has al-
ready been shown in the article, are a great tool for confirming your own uniqueness and
infallibility, especially on the assumption that others cannot be trusted. While the filter
bubble mechanism works similarly around the world, it seems that it can be assumed
that its effects may depend on the cultural characteristics of network users. Although
digitized reality may have its own culture and rules, then traditions and customs of reality
still seem to be the leading force in determining and arranging relationships in virtual
environments [Laurenson, 2014]. In this way, according to the author, the polarization
and radicalization of the Polish public debate has been strengthened to the maximum.

SUMMARY

One of the main hopes associated with the emergence and spread of the Internet
was its ability to create a public sphere and strengthen democratic debate that will fos-
ter consensus. The subsequent stages of the development of this medium showed the
deceptiveness of the expectations placed on it. In the era of the dominance of social
media, such as Facebook, there is an increasing fear that the Internet actually strength-
ens opinion polarization processes, because users interact with like-minded people, and
the tendency to personalize information on the web is growing. This technological bias
divides the online debate into virtual echo chambers in which the user hears only the in-
formation with which he agrees. In this way, the possibility of public debate is extremely
limited. The phenomenon of polarization of views is observed all over the world. Never
before has it been so easy to conflict entire societies. According to Philip Zimbardo,
polarization of the community to such an extent is a new phenomenon that will deepen.
Zimbardo argues it is because of the loss of true communication skills, which occurred
as a result of the development of new technologies [Suchan, 2019].

The impact of the filter bubble on the polarization of public debate is particularly
evident in Poland. Algorithms of social media “strengthened” by the national nature of
Poles divided Polish society into at least “two” functioning parallel Poland. To remedy
this, media education is needed in Poland. Hopefully, thanks to it Poles will be able to
leave their information bubbles and, on the basis of diverse information, conduct a ra-
tional public debate. Awareness of filter bubbles is the first step to leave them. It is hard
to disagree with Goethe, who said: “None are more hopelessly enslaved than those who
falsely believe they are free”. The time will show, what the future will bring.
References

ANDERSON M., CAUMONT A. (2014), How social media is reshaping the news, Pew Research Center, [online:
September 10, 2019], httos://www.pewresearch.org/fact-tank/2014/09/24/how-social-media-is-reshaping-
news/

BOSKI P,, (2009), Kulturowe ramy zachowah spotecznych, Warszawa, PWN.

GORSKA Z., (2019), Polscy uzytkownicy social media na koniec 2018: Messenger i Instagram rosty szybciej
niz Facebook, [online: 20 September, 2019], https://napoleancat.com/pl/blog/polscy-uzytkownicy-social-me-
dia-na-koniec-2018-messenger-i-instagram-rosna-szybciej-niz-facebook/

HILTIN P., RAINIE L., (2019), Facebook Algorithms and Personal Data, Pew Research Center, [online: 10 Octo-
ber 2019], https://www.pewresearch. org/internet/2019/01/16/facebook-algorithms-and-personal-data/

HONAN M. (2014), | liked everything | saw on Facebook for two days. Here’s what it did to me, , WIRED”, [online:
10 September 2019], htto://www.wired.com/2014/08/i-liked-everything-i-saw-on-facebook-for-two-daysheres-
what-it-did-to-me

JAMIESON K.H., CAPPELLA J.N. (2010), Echo Chamber: Rush Limbaugh and the Conservative Media Estab-
lishment, Oxford, Oxford University Press.

KAHNEMAN D., TVERSKY A. (1979), Prospect Theory: An Analysis of Decision under Risk, ,Econometrica’,
XLVII (1979), p. 263-291.

KOLANKO M., (2019), Sondaz: Glownym Zrddtem wiedzy cla Polakow jest telewizja, ,Rzeczpospolita’, [online:
15 Septeber, 2019], https://www.rp. pl/Mecia/190429917-Sondaz-Glownym-zrodlem-wiedzy-dla-Polakow-jest-
telewizja.html

KUCHTA M., (2019), Ilu uzytkownikow korzysta z sieci i social media w 2019 roku?, SocialPress, [online: 4 Sep-
tember 2019], https://socialpress.pl/2019/02/ilu-uzytkownikow-korzysta-z-sieci-i-sacial-media-w-201 9-roku
LAURENSON L., (2014) , Culture’s impact on social media adoption, [online:20 September 2019], https://www.
oreilly.com/ideas/cultures-impact-on-social-media-adoption

LEWANDOWSKI E., (2007), Co wiemy o charakterze Polakdw?, ,Polityka’, [online: 10 October 2019], https://
www. polityka.pl/tygodnikpolityka/spoleczenstwo/216105,2,co-wiemy-o-charakterze-polakow. read? page=528-
moduleld=4686

MALINOWSKI B., (2016), Jak Facebook zamyka nas w barice informacyjnej. Algorytm filtrujacy newsfeed a
zjawisko filter bubble, ,Zarzadzanie mediami’”, Tom 4(1)2016, pp. 15-22.

MCCOMBES M.E., SHAW D.L, WEAVER D.H., (2014), New directions in agenda-setting theory and research,
“Mass Communication and Society’, Vol. 17, nr 6.

NOWAK E., RIEDEL R., (2008), Agenda setting, priming, news framing. Analiza pordwnawoza telewizyjnych
audycji informacyjnych TVN i TVP1 w okresie kampanii przedwyborczych w Polsce 2005 i 2007 r., ,Zeszyty
Prasoznaweze’, nr 1-2.

NOWAK E., (2016), Teoria agenda-setting a nowe media, ,Studia Medioznawcze’, 3 (66), pp. 11-24.

PARISER E., (2011), Beware online “filter bubbles”, ,TED”, [online: 10 September 2019], http://www.ted.com/
talks/eli_pariser_beware_online_filter_oubbles

PEDZIWIATR K., ( 2019), The new Polish migration policy — false start, openDemocracy, [online: 1 September
2019], httos://www.opendemocracy.net/en/can-europe-make-it/the-new-polish-migration-policy-false-start/?f-
dclid=lwAR1nc-4PTgaBCl-ow660PnNKjuqiBQbahH_SWLOrjaz3imKWDEIAu_dCHw

PIASECKI K.,(2018), Gosé Radia Zet: Rafat Trzaskowski, [online; 3 September 2019], httos://www.radiozet.
ol/Radio/Programy/Gosc-Radia-ZET/Rafal-Trzaskowski-Jezeli-PK W-powie-ze-nie-wolno-czegos-robic-zastosu-
je-sie

PISAREK W. (ed.), (2006), Stownik terminologii mecialnej, Krakow, Universitas.

PRENSKY M., (2001), Digital Natives, Digital Immigrants, [online: 4 July 2019], httos://www.marcprensky.com/
writing/Prensky%20%20Digital%20Natives, %20Digital%20|mmigrants%20-%20Part1 .pdf

PYZIKOWSKA A., (2001), Teoria agenda-setting i jej zastosowanie, [in:] Dobek-Ostrowska B. (ed.), Nauka o
komunikowaniu. Podstawowe orientacje teoretyczne, Wroctaw, Wydawnictwo Uniwersytetu Wroctawskiego.
ROSEN CH. (2004/2005). The Age of Egocasting, “The New Atlantis’, vol.7, 9.51-72, [online: 10 September
2019], https://www.thenewatlantis.com/publications/the-age-of-egacasting

Statista,(2019), Distribution of Facebook users worldwide as of October 2019, by age and gender, [online: 2
November 2019], https://www.statista.com/statistics/376128/facebook-global-user-age-cistribution/

Statista, (2019), Main sources of news content in Poland in 2016 and 2018, [online: 2 November 2019], https://

51
52

www. statista.com/statistics/980473/poland-news-sources/

SUCHAN M., (2019), Philip Zimbardo: Stworzenia spoteczne mile widziane-wywiad, [online: 22 November
2019], https://fakty.interia.pl/wywiady/news-philip-zimbardo-stworzenia-spoleczne-mile-widziane,nlc,3349089

SZPUNAR M., (2018), Kancepcja banki filtrujacej a hipernarcyzm nowych medidw, ,Zeszyty Prasoznawcze’,
T.61, nr 2(234), pp. 191-200.
