Association for Information Systems

AIS Electronic Library (AlSeL)

: Al and Semantic Technologies for Intelligent
AMCIS 2020 Proceedings Information Systems (SIGODIS)

Aug 10th, 12:00 AM

Leveraging Cross Domain Recommendation Models to Alleviate
Filter Bubble Problems

Jianshan Sun
Hefei University of Technology, sunjs9413@hfut.edu.cn

Jian Song
Hefei University of Technology, 775301251 @qq.com

Yuanchun Jiang
School of Management, Hefei University of Technology, ycjiang@hfut.edu.cn

Yezheng Liu
School of Management, Hefei University of Technology, liuyezheng@hfut.edu.cn

Mingyue Zhu
Hefei University of Technology, 3238689883@qq.com

Follow this and additional works at: https://aisel.aisnet.org/amcis2020

Recommended Citation

Sun, Jianshan; Song, Jian; Jiang, Yuanchun; Liu, Yezheng; and Zhu, Mingyue, "Leveraging Cross Domain
Recommendation Models to Alleviate Filter Bubble Problems" (2020). AMCIS 2020 Proceedings. 11.
https://aisel.aisnet.org/amcis2020/ai_semantic_for_intelligent_info_systems/
ai_semantic_for_intelligent_info_systems/11

This material is brought to you by the Americas Conference on Information Systems (AMCIS) at AIS Electronic
Library (AlSeL). It has been accepted for inclusion in AMCIS 2020 Proceedings by an authorized administrator of
AIS Electronic Library (AlSeL). For more information, please contact elibrary@aisnet.org.
Cross Domain Recommendation Models to Alleviate Filter Bubble

Leveraging Cross Domain Recommendation
Models to Alleviate Filter Bubble Problems

Completed Research
Jianshan Sun Jian Song
School of management, Hefei University of School of management, Hefei University of
Technology, Hefei, China Technology, Hefei, China
sunjs9413@hfut.edu.cn 775301251@qq.com
Yuanchun Jiang Yezheng Liu
School of management, Hefei University of School of management, Hefei University of
Technology, Hefei, China Technology, Hefei, China
ycjiang@hfut.edu.cn liuyezheng @hfut.edu.cn
Mingyue Zhu

School of management, Hefei University of Technology, Hefei, China

22328689883@qq.com

Abstract

With the development of Web-based social networks, reeommender systems have become prevalent and
integral to how users are interacting with the Internet. They filter out redundant information and
personalize relevant and interesting items to online users. However, the positive reinforcement effect of
recommender systems narrows users’ information experiences and cause filter bubble problems. How to
provide relevant and diversified items for online users are becoming a challenging issue. In this study, we
develop a novel cross domain matrix factorization model with adaptive diversity regularization to tackle the
above challenges. We leverage the social tags and adaptive diversity regularization to improve
recommendation performance. We conducted a comprehensive experiment on a real social media site to
verify the effectiveness of the proposed method. The results show that the proposed method is able to
achieve a decent balance between the accuracy and diversity of recommendation.

Keywords

Filter bubbles, cross-domain recommender system, matrix factorization, diversity.

Introduction

With the development of web-based social networks, online users have access to a large number of products
and services. However, this large number of items can quickly become unmanageable and cause
‘information overload’ problems for users. Against this background, recommender systems are developed
to filter out redundant information and personalize relevant and interesting items to each user’s taste
(Adomavicius and Kwon 2011). Nowadays, recommender systems have become ubiquitous and integral to
how users are interacting with the Internet.

Recommender systems have provided a personalized web experience and deliver relevant content according
to users’ perceived interests and the interests of similar people to whom a user is connected. Certainly, they
can accurately find preferred items for users. At the same time, they also polarize information perspectives
and reduce novelty and diversity, which have an important influence on user satisfaction. With the positive
reinforcement effect of recommender systems, online users are becoming to obtain narrowed information
or content and are trapping in information cocoons. These effects of biased information experiences are
often called echo chambers in the media communication community (Karlsen et al. 2017). However,

Americas Conference on Information Systems 1
Cross Domain Recommendation Models to Alleviate Filter Bubble

information retrieval researchers often refer them to filter bubbles, which are serf-reinforcing systems of
narrowing information experiences that isolate people from diversified viewpoints, beliefs or content
(Pariser 2011). Existing recommendation algorithms focus more on how to improve the accuracy of
recommendations but pay less attention to the diversity of the reeommendation results.

In order to solve the above problems, some researchers have explored a lot of algorithms to improve the
diversity of recommendations. For example, some basic recommendation models were employed to
generation recommendation lists and some strategies are designed to reorder the list to improve diversity
(Cheng et al. 2017; Wu et al. 2018). Furthermore, diversity was considered into the unified recommendation
models, such as adding diversity constraints (Gogna and Majumdar 2017) and using Determinantal Point
Processes (DPP) (Borodin 2009). However, existing diverse strategies are not personal but universal to all
users who often have different needs on diversity. Some people prefer more novel items, while others hope
to be recommended with content conforming to their personal preferences (Barraza-Urbina et al. 2015).
Furthermore, most recommendation algorithms only employ single domain knowledge to improve diversity.
Recently, cross-domain recommendations have begun to emerge rapidly. Since people are often interested
in many items and participate in many domains, cross-domain recommender systems can transfer
knowledge from the source domain to the target domain to alleviate data sparsity problems (Hu et al. 2018)
and to improve the accuracy of recommendations (Shevade and Murty 2019). However, existing cross-
domain recommendation methods focus more on recommendation accuracy than diversity. How to employ
cross-domain knowledge to balance accuracy and diversity to alleviate filter bubble problems remains a
very important issue.

In this paper, we develop a cross domain matrix factorization model with adaptive diversity regularization,
called AD-CDMF, to address the key challenges highlighted above. Firstly, we joint the rating matrices of
different domains for decomposition to migrate the rating patterns of the source domain. Secondly, we
leverage social tags to calculate inter-domain similarity to strengthen the inter-domain knowledge transfer
and ensure the accuracy of recommendations. Finally, we import the user's need for diversity from the
source domain and use the designed adaptive diversity regulation to promote diversity adaptively. The
proposed methods and models are evaluated through comprehensive experiments using the real dataset.
The results show that the proposed AD-CDMF model outperforms the baseline methods based on a variety
of recommendation metrics.

Related Work

With the rise of social media, people can share information with others at any time and they have more
channels to obtain all kinds of information. Although this can enhance the communication between users
to a certain extent, the possible negative impact has also attracted more and more attention of scholars. In
recent years, some scholars have proved that social networks may cause problems such as echo chambers
and filtering bubbles (Chitra and Musco 2020; Su et al. 2016). The recommendation algorithm, as a widely
used technology in social media, is also being discussed fiercely by scholars.

There is a debate whether recommender systems cause filter bubble problems. Some scholars believe that
recommendation algorithms can expose users to more diverse and unbiased information (Nguyen et al.
2014). However, most scholars believe that the use of recommendation systems may produce filter bubbles.
The term ‘filter bubble’ was coined by (Pariser 2011) and he believed that the recommendation systems
would connect users with information that was very similar to their existing views, thereby trapping users
in a constant environment, which would reduce users’ learning ability, creativity, and form filter bubbles.
And when a filtering algorithm is used, the polarization phenomenon became more serious. Through the
analysis and modeling of the recommendation system, (Fleder and Hosanagar 2009) proved that some
well-known recommendation algorithms would lead to a decrease in sales diversity, while making popular
products more popular. This actually reflects that the recommendation system may cause filter bubbles,
and users are trapped in a lack of diversity.

At present, to alleviate the ‘filter bubble’ dilemma, some researchers aim to increase the recommended
diversity. (Wu et al. 2018) proposed a greedy re-ranking method based on personality traits to improve the
diversity of recommendations. The method mainly includes two steps. The first step is to generate a
candidate item set based on the user's preferences. The second step is to integrate personality into a greedy
re-ranking process to generate the final diverse recommendation list. (Di Noia et al. 2017) also proposed a

Americas Conference on Information Systems 2
Cross Domain Recommendation Models to Alleviate Filter Bubble

recommendation method based on re-ranking. They first generated the recommendation list based on the
existing recommendation algorithms, and then used the newly proposed re-ranking method to modify the
recommendation list. Some other scholars make a diverse recommendation through a single-stage
approach. (Gogna and Majumdar 2017) proposed a single-stage optimization method by adding diversity
enhancing constraints to the matrix factorization model. Different from the traditional matrix factorization
method, they recovered the latent factor matrix of dense user and sparse item. Finally, the experimental
results on real world dataset showed that the method has a high diversity of results. (Wu et al. 2019)
proposed a recommendation method based on generative adversarial networks. A generator based on the
Determinantal Point Process (DPP) model was built to capture the diversity and relevance of items, while a
discriminator is used to distinguish the recommended items from the real items obtained from user
observation data.

Although there have been many studies on the improvement of the diversity of reeommendation results,
most of these studies have caused a slight loss in accuracy (Gogna and Majumdar 2017; Man et al. 2017),
and the recommendation of diversity is not enhanced adaptively according to users’ demand for diversity.
Moreover, most of these studies are recommendation diversity algorithms in a single domain, without
taking advantage of user interactions in other domains. In this paper, cross domain recommendation is
used to solve the problem of data sparsity, which can not only obtain high accuracy, but also improve the
diversity adaptively.

Cross Domain Recommendation Model with Adaptive Diversity
Regularization

In the previous works, diversity-oriented recommended systems were often designed to improve
recommendation diversity in a single domain. Compared with algorithms aiming to promoting diversity in
a single domain, cross-domain recommendation algorithms have been proposed to improve the diversity
of recommendations by providing better coverage of the range of user preferences (Winoto and Tang 2008).

In this study, we propose a cross domain matrix factorization model with adaptive diversity regularization
(AD-CDMF), our method adds two regularization terms to the traditional collective matrix factorization
model (i.e. the similarity regularization between the domain of source and target domain, and the adaptive
diversity regularization). We attempt to connect the learning process of matrix factorization both in the
source domain and target domain by adding the two regularization terms, and then improve the
recommendation diversity under the premise of not significantly reducing the recommendation accuracy.
Our proposed cross-domain recommendation model includes three main modules: collective matrix
factorization module, inter-domain similarity regularization module, and target domain adaptive diversity
regularization module.

Collective Matrix Factorization Module

Collective matrix factorization module aims to enrich the knowledge from relational domains through
collective matrix factorization of two correlation matrices (Singh and Gordon 2008). Given users are
overlap in the two different domains but the items are not, the objective function of CMF can be expressed
as:

2 2
LP,Qs@r) = > Y Ciy—< Pwd >) +>, >, Giy< Pw dy >) + AWCUPIP + QI? +1?) a)

ueu iEjs ueU jejT

Where U = US U UT is the set of all users, which we assume overlaps between the domains, /S is the source
domain items, JT is the target domain items, ||-|| is the Euclidean norm of a matrix, <-> represents dot
product of two vectors, Q; and Q; are matrices containing the item latent vectors in the source and target
domains respectively, P is the matrix containing the user latent vectors, R is the rating matrix ,and 4, is used
to prevent model overfitting. CMF model is leveraged to learn a latent vector P, € R* for each user u € U and
separately models source and target domain items q; and q,, with i € JS, and j € JT,and it always imports
additional user preference information from the source domain.

Americas Conference on Information Systems 3
Cross Domain Recommendation Models to Alleviate Filter Bubble

Inter-domain Similarity Regularization Module

The second module of our model is based on that latent vectors of related items should explain the semantic
similarities between them, in addition to the users’ preferences 7, ; ~< p,,, q; >. That is, we not only seek to
predict the users’ preferences, but also require that the item latent vectors of the target domain and the
source domain satisfy the inter-domain similarity constraint. To link different domains by importing the
inter-domain similarity regularization, we adopt the inter-domain similarity regularization proposed by
(Fernndez-Tobas et al. 2019), which is showed as follows:

mind, ». ». (Sj-< ana) >) (2)

ie js jejT

Where, q; and q; are the latent factor of the item i and the item j respectively, A, > 0 is the cross-domain
regularization parameter , controlling the contribution of the inter-domain similarity regularization, and
S,; is the inter-domain similarity matrix calculated by social tags of items from different domains, which is
demonstrated as follows:

<ViPVjT >

*o TTX"

(3)

Where ||-|| is the Euclidean norm of a matrix, <-> represents dot product of two vectors, V;/* is the semantic
vector of item i in the set of source domain items /S, v,/ T is the semantic vector of the item j in the set of
target domain items JT. V,/* and V;’" are calculated by using the co-occurrence relationship (Wartena et al.
2009) between self-carrying tags and several common tags related to genres between two domains. The
calculation process of V,/* and Vv, T is based on two assumptions, the first is that the more times two tags co-
occur, the closer the relationship becomes, the second is that users may have similar preferences for item
genres in different domains (Fernndez-Tobas et al. 2019), for example, people who like mystery novels
may like science fiction movies.

The inter-domain similarity regularization is used to regularize the item latent factors in the different
domains to satisfy the similarities between them and to improve the accuracy of recommendations. In the
following of the section, we propose an adaptive diversity regularization term to promote the
recommendation diversity adaptively.

Adaptive Diversity Regularization Module

The third module of our model is based on the assumption that latent vectors of related items in the target
domain should explain semantic distance between them and the strength of users’ demand for diversity, in
addition to the users’ preferences and inter-domain similarity. That is, we not only seek to predict the
preferences r,; ~< Dy, q; > and S;; ~< qi,q; >, but also require that the item latent vectors of the target
domain and the user latent vectors satisfy the adaptive diversity constraint.

In this section, we introduce the target domain adaptive diversity regularization term designed by us, which
is able to adjust the difference of users’ ratings for different styles of items in the target domain according
to the strength of users' demand for diversity. Specifically, if the distance between two items is bigger (i.e.
d,, ;, is bigger), and the demand for diversity of useruis bigger (i.e. N,,is bigger), the user latent vector p,, and
the item latent vectors q,, ,q;, will be regularized to decrease the difference of u’s ratings of these two items,

as follows:
2
minds > Nu) Aria, ~ Vi.) (a)
u JujoeJT
Where p,, is the userulatent vector, q,, is the item j, latent vector, q,, is the item j, latent vector, and Ag >

0 is the target-domain adaptive diversity regularization parameter, controlling the contribution of the
adaptive diversity regularization term, d(j,, j.) is the semantic distance between the item j, and the item j,

in the target domain, which is defined as follows:

Americas Conference on Information Systems 4
Cross Domain Recommendation Models to Alleviate Filter Bubble

dU, J2) = |¥j,7" ~ yj,7" || (5)

Where ||-|| is the Euclidean norm of a matrix, V;, J¥and Vi, J? are the semantic vector of the item j, and item
jz in the target domain respectively, which calculated by social tags as descripted in (Inter-domain

similarity regularization module).

And we adopt the idea of information entropy (Shannon 1948) to measure the degree of user demand for
diversity. N,, represents the demand for diversity of user u, which is shown as follows:

Nee
Ui

Mu, M.
MCD, Eri? °

Where M,, is the semantic vector of user u, calculated by the co-occurrence relationship between self-tagged
social tags and some common tags related to styles between two domains, which is similar to the calculation
process of V,/°and V;/". M,,, is the i element of vector M,,, and n,, is the number of common tags related
to styles between different domains. The larger N,, is, the more dispersed of the u-tagged items in style are,
indicating user u greater demand for diversity, and vice versa.

Learning Process of Proposed Model

The matrix factorization model with adaptive diversity regularization for cross-domain recommendation
proposed by us integrates above three modules. Let U = US U UT be the set of all users, which we assume
overlaps between the domains, and let ] = JS UJT be the set of all items, which we assume do not overlap.
Our model learns a latent vector p, € R* for each user u € U and separately models the item latent
vectors q; and q;, with i € JS, andj € JT. Our model’s loss function is as follows:

L(P,O5.0,)= >, =< PG >)

uel ie JS

+) Ss: 1, — < Purdy sy

uecUje JT

+A, Ss: Ss: (S,j- <9.) >y (7)
ie Bje JT

tN, YD Mi hMP.G,- 9,

ue Ip ieJT

+4, (IPI +|e,P +2,

Where all model parameters were explained as described above.

 

 

 

 

 

 

As in standard matrix factorization, we train our model using Alternating Least Squares (Bell and Koren
2007). Firstly, we fix Q,; and Q,, and solve analytically for each p,, by setting the gradient to zero:

Du = (2QEQs + 2QFQr + AaNu QPL Qr + 2A,E) "(ZOE + 2QFT uy) (8)

Where D is the semantic distance matrix between items in the target domain, Ly = D’ — D is the Laplacian
matrix of D, and D’ is the diagonal matrix with i‘” diagonal entry equal to ¥;, d(i, /), the vector 7, contains
the ratings of user u for all items in the source domain, and the vector 7,,, contains the ratings of user u for
all items in the target domain.

Secondly, we fix P and Q,, and compute the optimal values for q;. Again, by setting the corresponding
gradient to zero and solving analytically, we obtain:

qi = (PTD + AsQPQr + A,E) + x (PTH +A;,QTSi) (9)

As previously, the vector r; contains the ratings assigned to item i and s, is the i row of the inter-domain
semantic similarity matrix S.

Americas Conference on Information Systems 5
Cross Domain Recommendation Models to Alleviate Filter Bubble

Finally, we fix P and Q, to compute and optimal values ordinally for q;:

nT

Gj = (PTD + AsQEQs + AYE + AgH Ly (i) "(PTH + ASQES; — AH ». Ly, )4;’) (10)

fouy'si

Where H = P'N’P and N' € R@** is the diagonal matrix, where only the main diagonal has values
and N’;; = N;, Lp, (k) is the k‘* element of the k'” row of the matrix Lp, n; is the number of items in the
target domain, as previously, the vector 7; contains the ratings assigned to item j and s; is the j* column of
the inter-domain semantic similarity matrix S.

Experimental Design
Datasets

In our work, we adopt a widely used dataset from Douban (Zhong et al. 2014) - a Chinese online social
networking platform, which includes 3191,620 ratings from 33,559 users in the book domain, 5115,162
ratings from 33,417 users in the movie domain, and 2528,925 ratings from 26,962 users in the music
domain. It also includes rich metadata of items, such as abstract, language, and social tags on items. In
order to train and validate our proposed cross-domain recommendation model, we choose the book domain
and the movie domain with a large number of common users as the research objects. We consider the book
domain with sparser ratings as the target domain and treat the movie domain with denser ratings as the
source domain. We adopt the following preprocessing similar to the one done in (Gao et al. 2013). Statistics
of the preprocessed datasets are given in Table 1.

 

Domain | # users | # items | # ratings | density | # social tags | role

 

Movie(M) | 4212 13362 1825147 3.22% 124250 source

 

Book(B) 4212 8329 627963 1.79% 117692 target

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

Table 1. Statistics of the Douban Dataset

Evaluation Metrics

In order to evaluate recommendation accuracy, we apply Mean Absolute Error (MAE) for performance
analysis (Cantador et al. 2015). Its definition is shown below:

1
MAE = |arest| ». bray ~ | (11)

(ufeatest

Where, 7 is the test set and smaller values of MAE indicate better recommendation performance. For
item recommendation, we reckon it as a content retrieval system to recommend to users the most diverse
and relevant top-K items. The evaluation metrics, CC@K and a — NDCG,,@K are applied to assess the
recommendation diversity of different methods.

The CC@K is measured by the quantity of categories covered by top-K items divided by the total number of
categories available in the dataset (Ashkan et al. 2015). A higher category coverage demonstrates the top-K
items are more diverse in topic, as follows:

CC@K = (12)

 

Where, C,, is the quantity of categories covered by top-K items, and C;,; is the total number of categories.

The @ — NDCG,,@K is a high-authority diversity evaluation approach, which is used to reward newly
discovered themes and punish superfluous ones (Chandar and Carterette 2013):

Americas Conference on Information Systems 6
Cross Domain Recommendation Models to Alleviate Filter Bubble

K

G,@i

a —NDCG,@K =z, ) ——
A log(1 +i)

(43)

Where G,,@k is the gain at the i“ position with respect to the given user u. In particular, G,,@k is defined
as follows:

Cei-1

G@k = ) (=a) (14)
VteT
Where c,,; is the quantity of times that topic t has presented in the ranking of the recommendation list up
to the i position.

Experimental Procedure

In order to reduce the impact of variations in the training set, we adopt the N-fold cross validation. The
ratings of target domain are divided into three subsets with similar distributions and sizes. And then the
union of two subsets is taken as the training set, while the remaining subset is reckoned as the test set. We
performed the process three times and record the result of average test as the result of the 3-fold cross
validation. Furthermore, for comparison, we tested eight methods: MF, PMF, CUNE-MF, SVD, SVD++,
CMF and two models proposed by us, one without adaptive diversity regularization and the other with
adaptive diversity regularization.

(1) MF: MF is the basic and popular model of recommender systems.

(2) PMF (Mnih and Salakhutdinov 2008): PMF is the probabilistic version of MF and we user the standard
probabilistic matrix factorization model.

(3) CUNE_MF: The CUNE_MF model proposed by (Zhao et al. 2011) extends MF by identifying the top-K
semantic friends of each user by network embedding technology.

(4) SVD (Golub and Reinsch 1971): SVD could make matrix decomposed into singular vectors and singular
values and is one of the matrix factorization algorithms.

(5) SVD++: SVD+-+ is one of matrix factorization algorithms proposed by (Koren 2008) that simultaneously
considers user bias, item bias and user implicit feedback information.

(6) CMF: CMF proposed by (Singh and Gordon 2008), couples rating matrices for all domains on the item
or user dimension so as to transfer information through the common item-factor matrix or user-factor
matrix.

(7) CDMF: Cross-domain matrix factorization model without adaptive diversity regularization.
(8) AD_CDMF: Cross-domain matrix factorization model without adaptive diversity regularization.

Henceforth, concerning these eight approaches, the first five demonstrate single-domain recommended
approaches while the remainder show cross-domain recommended approaches.

Results and Discussions

The recommender system techniques were implemented and the results were compared in the RecQ
recommender system library Platform (Tang et al. 2012). We tuned properly the parameters of all methods,
and the performance of the eight recommendation methods is reported in the following subsections.

Recommendation Accuracy
The recommendation accuracy of recommendation models is given in Table2, and the performance of CDCF
is better than any other comparison models. Since CDCF leverages social tags to transfer knowledge

between domains, and utilizes inter-domain similarity regularization to control the intensity of knowledge
transfer between domains, which may import considerable knowledge with consistency of user preferences.

Americas Conference on Information Systems 7
Cross Domain Recommendation Models to Alleviate Filter Bubble

 

 

Methods MAE MAE improvements over baseline MF
Single-domain method MF 0.58927 __
PMF 0.57773 —

CUNE_MF 0.57598
SVD 0.56984
SVD++ 0.58156

Cross-domain method CMF 0.59723 __
CDMF 0.55581 5.7%
AD_CDMF 0.58126 1.4%

 

Table 2. Recommendation Accuracy of the Eight Methods*

Furthermore, we note that SVD is the best performing algorithm between single-domain methods. Perhaps
it’s because SVD factorize the matrix into singular vectors and singular values, and the target domain
information could be better utilized than other methods. CMF's recommendation accuracy is the worst,
probably because jointing the matrices of the two domains for factorization increases the score sparsity.
Besides, the performance of AD_CDMF in accuracy is moderate, but not far behind the best algorithms. It’s
probably because the adaptive diversity regularization causes the loss of recommendation accuracy. And
compared with other algorithms, AD_CDMF aims to enhance more coverage of user preferences instead of
consistency of user preferences by importing the adaptive diversity regularization.

In summary, the proposed CDCF model is able to improve recommendation accuracy effectively, while the
proposed AD_CDMF model could promise certain recommendation accuracy.

Recommendation Diversity

To evaluate the recommended diversity of these methods, we consider the top-10 recommended scenario,
where a list of top-10 rated items is recommended for each user. It is because that each book has almost 3
styles, but the total number of styles is less than 15. If the recommendation list contains a large or a too
small number of items, it is easy to make the diversity metric lose its significance (Cheng et al. 2017).

 

Sy cc@10
Bes) o-NDCG@10

 

wie ca i SS St Lor art™ OS ove

Figure 1. Diversity Performance of the Eight Recommendation Methods

Figure 1 demonstrates the performance of all recommendation methods in diversity. We observe that the
proposed AD_CDMF model is clearly the best performing approach, both in CC@10 and a — NDCG,,@10.
Since our approach leverages the underlying CMF framework to introduce additional user preference
information, and further adjusts diversity with adaptive diversity regularization. What’s more, we notice
CUNE_MF gets the worst diversity performance, since recommendation diversity suffers with the import
of semantic friend information for users. CMF model has the worst performance of diversity between cross-

 

* Best values for each single-domain and cross-domain methods are shown in bold, and overall best values
are underlined.

Americas Conference on Information Systems 8
Cross Domain Recommendation Models to Alleviate Filter Bubble

domain methods, probably because the rating pattern introduced from the source domain is less conducive
to the improvement of diversity than the social tags.

Furthermore, by comparing these results with Table 2, we observe that although it is commonly said that
diversification by its nature results in deterioration in accuracy as a cost of introducing diversity
(Wasilewski and Hurley 2018). The single-domain model SVD and the cross-domain model AD-CDMF are
able to provide a good trade-off of decent diversity and the most accurate recommendations compared to
other algorithms.

Conclusion and Future Work

Recommender systems bring benefits and convenience for our life and also may cause filter bubble issues.
In this paper, we proposed a cross domain matrix factorization model with adaptive diversity regularization.
The proposed model leveraged social tags as bridge to link the target and source domain to promise decent
recommendation accuracy and utilized adaptive diversity regularization to improve recommendation
diversity. Comprehensive experiments were conducted on a real social media website to evaluate the
effectiveness of the proposed model. Through the analysis of the results, we draw the following conclusions.
Firstly, the use of social tags is very effective in overcoming the low recommendation accuracy caused by
the sparsity of the target domain. Secondly, the addition of adaptive regularization designed by us can
effectively improve the individual diversity of reeommendations. Thirdly, our proposed model can achieve
a good balance between the accuracy and diversity of recommendations.

Several future research directions also exist for this study. Firstly, only one type of social media site (the
Douban dataset) to validate the proposed approach in this paper. We will extend our approach to other sites
(such as Amazon) to improve its applicability and generalizability. Secondly, we will explore user’s need for
diversity in more advanced ways, such as leveraging more user history interaction data, or treating it as
parameters that require implicit learning.

Acknowledgement

This work is supported by the National Natural Science Foundation of China (71872060, 91846201,
71490725, 71722010, 91546114, and 91746302), partially Sponsored by Zhejiang Lab (No. 2019KEOABo4).

REFERENCES

Adomavicius, G., and Kwon, Y. 2011. "Improving aggregate recommendation diversity using ranking-based
techniques,” IEEE Transactions on Knowledge and Data Engineering (24:5), pp 896-911.

Ashkan, A., Kveton, B., Berkovsky, S., and Wen, Z. 2015. "Optimal greedy diversity for reeommendation,"”
Twenty-Fourth International Joint Conference on Artificial Intelligence.

Barraza-Urbina, A., Heitmann, B., Hayes, C., and Carrillo-Ramos, A. 2015. "XPLODIV: An exploitation-
exploration aware diversification approach for recommender systems," The Twenty-Eighth
International Flairs Conference.

Bell, R.M., and Koren, Y. 2007. "Scalable collaborative filtering with jointly derived neighborhood
interpolation weights," Seventh IEEE International Conference on Data Mining (CDM 2007), IEEE,
Pp. 43-52.

Borodin, A. 2009. "Determinantal point processes," arXiv preprint arXiv:0911.1153).

Cantador, I., Fernndez-Tobas, I., Berkovsky, S., and Cremonesi, P. "Cross-domain recommender systems,"
in: Recommender systems handbook, Springer, 2015, pp. 919-959.

Chandar, P., and Carterette, B. 2013. "Preference based evaluation measures for novelty and diversity,”
Proceedings of the 36th international ACM SIGIR conference on Research and development in
information retrieval, pp. 413-422.

Cheng, P., Wang, S., Ma, J., Sun, J., and Xiong, H. 2017. "Learning to recommend accurate and diverse
items,” Proceedings of the 26th international conference on World Wide Web, pp. 183-192.

Chitra, U., and Musco, C. 2020. "Analyzing the Impact of Filter Bubbles on Social Network Polarization,"
Proceedings of the 13th International Conference on Web Search and Data Mining, pp. 115-123.

Di Noia, T., Rosati, J.. Tomeo, P., and Di Sciascio, E. 2017. "Adaptive multi-attribute diversity for
recommender systems,” Information Sciences (382), pp 234-253.

Americas Conference on Information Systems 9
Cross Domain Recommendation Models to Alleviate Filter Bubble

Fernndez-Tobas, I., Cantador, I., Tomeo, P., Anelli, V.W., and Di Noia, T. 2019. "Addressing the user cold
start with cross-domain collaborative filtering: exploiting item metadata in matrix factorization," User
Modeling and User-Adapted Interaction (29:2), pp 443-486.

Fleder, D., and Hosanagar, K. 2009. "Blockbuster culture's next rise or fall: The impact of recommender
systems on sales diversity," Management science (55:5), pp 697-712.

Gao, S., Luo, H., Chen, D., Li, S., Gallinari, P., and Guo, J. 2013. "Cross-domain recommendation via
cluster-level latent factor model,” Joint European conference on machine learning and knowledge
discovery in databases, Springer, pp. 161-176.

Gogna, A., and Majumdar, A. 2017. "DiABIlO: Optimization based design for improving diversity in
recommender system,” Information Sciences (378), pp 59-74.

Golub, G.H., and Reinsch, C. "Singular value decomposition and least squares solutions," in: Linear
Algebra, Springer, 1971, pp. 134-151.

Hu, G., Zhang, Y., and Yang, Q. 2018. "Conet: Collaborative cross networks for cross-domain
recommendation,” Proceedings of the 27th ACM International Conference on Information and
Knowledge Management, pp. 667-676.

Karlsen, R., Steen-Johnsen, K., Wollebk, D., and Enjolras, B. 2017. "Echo chamber and trench warfare
dynamics in online debates,” European Journal of Communication (32:3), pp 257-273.

Koren, Y. 2008. "Factorization meets the neighborhood: a multifaceted collaborative filtering model,”
Proceedings of the 14th ACM SIGKDD international conference on Knowledge discovery and data
mining, pp. 426-434.

Man, T., Shen, H., Jin, X., and Cheng, X. 2017. "Cross-Domain Recommendation: An Embedding and
Mapping Approach.,” IJCAI, pp. 2464-2470.

Mnih, A., and Salakhutdinov, R.R. 2008. "Probabilistic matrix factorization," Advances in neural
information processing systems, pp. 1257-1264.

Nguyen, T.T., Hui, P., Harper, F.M., Terveen, L., and Konstan, J.A. 2014. "Exploring the filter bubble: the
effect of using recommender systems on content diversity,” Proceedings of the 23rd international
conference on World wide web, pp. 677-686.

Pariser, E. 2011. The filter bubble: What the Internet is hiding from you Penguin UK.

Shannon, C.E. 1948. "A mathematical theory of communication," Bell system technical journal (27:3), pp
379-423.

Shevade, S., and Murty, M.N. 2019. "Neural Cross-Domain Collaborative Filtering with Shared Entities,”
arXiv preprint arXiv:1907.08440).

Singh, A.P., and Gordon, G.J. 2008. "Relational learning via collective matrix factorization,” Proceedings
of the 14th ACM SIGKDD international conference on Knowledge discovery and data mining, pp. 650-
658.

Su, J., Sharma, A., and Goel, S. 2016. "The effect of recommendations on network structure," Proceedings
of the 25th international conference on World Wide Web, pp. 1157-1167.

Tang, J., Gao, H., and Liu, H. 2012. "mTrust: discerning multi-faceted trust in a connected world,”
Proceedings of the fifth ACM international conference on Web search and data mining, pp. 93-102.

Wartena, C., Brussee, R., and Wibbels, M. 2009. "Using tag co-occurrence for recommendation,” 2009
Ninth International Conference on Intelligent Systems Design and Applications, IEEE, pp. 273-278.

Wasilewski, J., and Hurley, N. 2018. "Intent-aware item-based collaborative filtering for personalised
diversification,” Proceedings of the 26th Conference on User Modeling, Adaptation and
Personalization, pp. 81-89.

Winoto, P., and Tang, T. 2008. "If you like the devil wears prada the book, will you also enjoy the devil
wears prada the movie? a study of cross-domain recommendations,” New Generation Computing
(26:3), pp 209-225.

Wu, Q., Liu, Y., Miao, C., Zhao, Y., Guan, L., and Tang, H. 2019. "Recent advances in diversified
recommendation,” arXiv preprint arXiv:1905.06589).

Wu, W., Chen, L., and Zhao, Y. 2018. "Personalizing recommendation diversity based on user personality,"
User Modeling and User-Adapted Interaction (28:3), pp 237-270.

Zhao, J., Lui, J.C., Towsley, D., Guan, X., and Zhou, Y. 2011. "Empirical analysis of the evolution of follower
network: A case study on Douban,” 2011 IEEE Conference on Computer Communications Workshops
(INFOCOM WKSHPS), IEEE, pp. 924-929.

Zhong, E., Fan, W., and Yang, Q. 2014. "User behavior learning and transfer in composite social networks,"
ACM Transactions on Knowledge Discovery from Data (TKDD) (8:1), pp 1-32.

Americas Conference on Information Systems 10
