a
View metadata, citation and similar papers at core.ac.uk brought to you by 2. CORE

DAN ILMU POLITIK

 

provided by Jurnal Ilmu Sosial dan Ilmu Politik

 

Jurnal Ilmu Sosial dan Hmu Politik

Volume 22, Issue 2, November 2018 (112-126)
ISSN 1410-4946 (Print), 2502-7883 (Online)
doi: 10.22146/jsp.33244

 

Persecution Act as Filter Bubble Effect:
Digital Society and The Shift of Public Sphere

Arina Rohmatul Hidayah

Department of Communications Science, Faculty of Social and Political Sciences, Universitas Gadjah Mada
(email: arinarohmatulh@gmail.com)

Abstract

This article discusses persecution acts associated with the filter bubble effect, the condition of
digital society, the concept of the public sphere and the rational action theory of Jurgen Habermas.
The results, obtained through the literature research method, show that acts of persecution in
social media can be caused by the personalization of the web. Social media allows the occurrence
of large bubbles (filter bubbles) that make users reject ideologies or other truths. This becomes
a revolution of mindset due to the freedom of information. Meanwhile, in the Habermas
public sphere concept, which emphasizes the existence of a critical and rational discussion, this
phenomenon indicates a shift. The shift that occurs brings about the lifeworld realm as the basis
for the formation of the public sphere with its communicative action, again dominated by the
system realm that is dominated by capitalist forces through strategic action. Thus, Habermas's
initial goal of strengthening civil society's position against the dominance of the system is now
changing.

Keywords:

persecution; filter bubble effect; social media; digital society; public sphere

Introduction

Still remember clearly how the
sovereignty of Indonesia a bit shaky with the
events of December 2, 2016 (212) yesterday. On
the official site of tirto.id, explained that the
action began when Ahok paid a working visit
to the Kepulauan Seribu on Tuesday, September
27, 2016. During a speech in front of the people,
Ahok said not to force citizens to vote himself
in the elections 2017. The statement was
accompanied by quotation from Al Maidah
verse 51 reaping public reactions. On Thursday,
October 6, 2016, Ahok’s video about Al Maidah
verse 51 was viral on social media, through
a Facebook network owned by Buni Yani
(Debora, 2016). This case has created tension
among the Muslim community who became
the majority religion in Indonesia. Jokowi as

Head of Government seeks to consolidate
with a number of religious leaders so that the
condition of society can be controlled.

In those days the public voice was split
between those who thought that Ahok was
innocent and those who considered him “toying
with” QS. Al-Maidah verse 53. This condition is
then allegedly caused many cases of persecution.
In the official website, www.ccnindonesia.
com, explained that the network of freedom of
expression volunteers in Southeast Asia, Safenet
noted as many as 59 people have been subjected
to target persecution or ‘hunt’ intimidative post-
rolling cases of blasphemy that ensnare Basuki
Tjahaja Purnama alias Ahok. The so-called ‘The
Ahok Effect’ precision waves appear especially
after Ahok is convicted. Safenet has since
recorded a drastic rise in reporting referring to

€JoP HUUIIIAUTTELLLLLIMMHIEELLL 242

JURNAL ILMU SOSIAL
DAN ILMU POLITIK
Arina Rohmatul Hidayah, Persecution Act as Filter Bubble Effect: Digital Society and The Shift of Public Sphere

Article 28 paragraph 2 of the Information and
Electronic Transactions Act (Gual, 2017).

Ahok’s case is asmall part of various other
persecution cases. According to Big Indonesian
Dictionary, persecution is the arbitrary hunting
of a person or a number of citizens and is
harmed, harassed, or crushed (www.kbbi.
web.id, 2017, para. 1). And interestingly, the
persecution is rife in social media as the impact
of web personalization or familiarly called
filter bubble effect. It must be admitted that
social media has complicated algorithms, one
click and like methods will determine what
information we receive next. Recently others
have argued that personalization algorithms
used by online services such as Facebook and
Google display users similar perspectives
and ideas and remove opposing viewpoints
on behalf of the users without their consent
(Pariser 2011 as cited in Bozdag & Hoven, 2015,
p. 249).

Furthemore, Pariser (2011) mention
that this might lead to the situation in which
the user receives biased information. In case
of political information, it might lead to the
situation that the user never sees contrasting
viewpoints on a political or moral issue. Users
will be placed ina “filter bubble” and they will
not even know what they are missing (as cited
in Bozdag & Hoven, 2015, p. 249).

People’s life is likely to change since the
arrival of new media. Information plays an
important role for now, so it is reasonable if
the state of society in the digital age referred to
as the information society. Digital society has
made digital communication and information
flow a vital part of everyday life, although
access to the Internet and digital technologies
varies around the globe (Hansen et al., 2017, p.
80). Through that information, someone has full
authority to regulate himself and others will be
like what. Includes issues of persecution due
to the shackled mindset at a certain point of
view. The world is created by someone with
information that he gets in social media.

Referring to the above issues, it cannot
be separated from the role of social media
as a public sphere. Social media becomes a
facility for anyone, both ordinary citizens
and government officials to connect and
communicate as well as the principle of public
sphere described by Charles & Rohwer (2015,
p. 1) that this was a space where individuals
gathered to discuss with each other, and
sometimes with public officials, matters of
shared concern. The aim of these gatherings
was not simply discourse; these gatherings
allowed the bourgeoisie to use their reason
to determine the boundaries of public and
private and to self-consciously develop the
public sphere. The term “discussion” refers to
social media as a public sphere that allows for
the rational exchange of ideas about policies
relating to citizens. Each member engages in
critical discussions with different points of
view. There is an interaction going on, so a
more rational and well-judged argument will
be accepted.

From that concept, the phenomenon that
occurs today has shifted from the basic function
of public sphere. With the act of persecution
as a filter bubble effect, indicates the loss of
critical power and the absence of arguments.
Social media can be a space for anyone to lead
public opinion to be the same as their beliefs.
Forgings are so strong, something that is
consumed every day, even every second, can
change a person’s perspective. In addition to
sparking the concept of public sphere, as a
continuation, Habermas also reveals the theory
of actor’s rational action that emphasize the
rationality in the public sphere itself. Divided
into two types of actions, namely the act of
instrumental rationality and communicative
rationality. These two actions can be used as
an analytical tool in seeing the persecution act
in social media as filter bubble effect.

Departing from this issue, it will be
discussed more deeply how acts of persecution
in social media are associated with filter bubble

113 UULTTNTTTTTTTTTTTT TTT TTT @JoP

JURNAL ILMU SOSIAL
DAN ILMU POLITIK
Jurnal IImu Sosial dan Ilmu Politik, Volume 22, Issue 2, November 2018

effect, digital society contexts, actors’ rational
actions and the loss of critical discussions in
public sphere such as Yetkinel & Colak’s (2017,
p. 5011) statement that the 18" century concept
developed by Jurgen Habermas, where public
sphere got to be known for its undiluted, critical
nature backed by the power of reasoning.

This discussion is important because
not many journal articles have linked the five
keywords above. Previous studies have dealt
with it more separately, whereas in terms
of the fifth concept, they are related to each
other, both as cause and effect factors. Such
as research from Caplan & Boyd (2016, p.
15) that only associate algorithms on social
media like Facebook and Twitter with the
concept of public sphere. From his research
shows, all systems of power are manipulated
and there is little doubt that public spheres
constructed through network technologies and
algorithms can be manipulated, both by the
architects of those systems and by those who
find techniques to shape information flows.
On the other hand, there are related research
on the persecution associated with online
shaming and the right to privacy. This paper
advances privacy theory through examination
of online shaming, focusing in particular on
persecution by internet mobs (Laidlaw, 2017,
p. 1). Unfortunately, this research does not
include filter bubble effect as the cause of online
shaming or basic concept of public sphere that
essentially upholds rationality and critical
discussion without unilateral thought like the
phenomenon.

Literature Review
Social Media and Digital Society
Digitalization of media resulted in an
interactive platform of social media. Related
to the definition, Kaplan & Haenlein (2010, p.
61) mentions that there is no single definition
“What is Social Media’ There is more of a kind
of description of what the process of social
media by underlying the interaction among

DAN ILMU POLITIK

people in which they are creating, sharing,
exchanging, modifying their ideas in virtual
communities or networks: “Social Media is a
group of Internet based applications that build
on the ideological foundations of Web 2.0, and
that allow the creation and exchange of User
Generated Content” (as cited in Bank, 2014, p.
1185).

In social media, users have a freedom
to access the desired information. Unlike the
previous traditional media where information
obtained by the public is determined by the
media or the so-called agenda setting. They
have no authority over what is consumed. What
is important for the media to be important also
for the audiences. As for now, the statement
instead turned what is important for the
audiences, is that important for the media.
Because, through social media users can
determine which topics are most in demand,
resulting in anumber of traditional media such
as television and newspapers are competing
proclaimed it. Therefore, the spread of social
media platforms provides an opportunity
for enhanced access to information and a
diversification of sources and opinions. Social
media have greatly advanced the possibilities
of “citizen journalism”. They provide channels
for everyone to reach out to the public, to
share information, and to express opinions
without formal requirements and with a
minimum interference in form of regulation
and censorship (Kamp, 2016, p. 5).

Furthermore, Dr. William Tayeebwa,
Head of the Department of Journalism and
Communication at Makerere University,
in his keynote address at the KAS Social
Media Conference 2015, explained about
opportunities and challenges of the use of new
media technologies, particularly social media.
According to William, the chance encompasses:
first, social media can improve accessibility
as it allows citizens to reach out to political
leaders through different channels, second,
social media can facilitate the dissemination

EOP. TETTET TET TTT 214
Arina Rohmatul Hidayah, Persecution Act as Filter Bubble Effect: Digital Society and The Shift of Public Sphere

of information for decision-making and
the transfer of knowledge to the citizens,
third, social media can provide platforms for
discussion of pertinent issues between citizens
and their leaders and among the citizens
themselves, fourth, social media can facilitate
effective networking among the citizens and the
creation of different forms of organisations and
communities, fifth, social media can provide
avenues for more participatory, inclusive and
deliberative processes of decision-making,
sixth, social media can mobilise citizens around
a cause and can spur social-political action.
While the challenge is: firstly, accessibility
may be impeded by a number of barriers
such as poor infrastructure, poor literacy,
cultural apprehension to new technologies,
or profit interests, secondly, there appears
to be a generational gap, with the younger
generation making much more use of the
opportunities of the internet and social media,
thirdly, some observers see a tendency of the
state to try to monitor, regulate or even block
social media in a way that may threaten the
freedom of expression online, fourthly, social
media has increasingly become a channel for
different forms of offenses and so-called “cyber-
crime”- such as “cyber-bullying”, stalking,
defamation, spread of false information
and inciting messages, fifthly, social media
increase the trend of “information overload”
which makes it harder to filter out relevant
and useful information and can lead to “social
fragmentation” and “digital isolation” (Kamp,
2016, p. 7-8).

Responding to the statement above,
the advantages and challenges of using new
media, especially social media, cannot be
separated from its role in giving and receiving
information. The flow of information is so
dense, resulting in a condition called the
information society. This is the condition of
society in the digital era today. People become
heavily dependent on information every
second and minute in their daily lives. Becla in

the journal Information Society and Knowledge-
Based Economy-Development Level and The Main
Barriers-Some Remarks explained that the notion
of the information society was introduced Tadlo
Umeaso in 1963. He defined the information
society as the society getting informed through
the computer. The first group of definition
which one can name “technological” came into
being this way. The influence of technology
on people's lives is mentioned by Martin
Bangemann as “the revolution based on the
information, which is a picture of human
knowledge”. Technological progress makes
possible to process, storage, regain, and pass
the information, in every possible form — verbal,
written, or visual — unrestricted by distance,
time and volume (Bangemann, 1994, as cited
in Becla, 2012, p. 126).

Borrowing the term “revolution based
on the information” mentioned by Martin,
certainly not only related to the geographical
aspects in which the technology can merge
the boundaries of distance and time. It also
includes aspects of the behavioral revolution,
lifestyle, and the mindset of people, which is
currently heavily influenced by the information
they consume through new media. One
illustration of the change has been explained by
Dr. William Tayeebwa above about cybercrime
that allows anyone to commit an information
crime, either spreading false news to slander a
person or particular group, spreading radical
information, and so on.

Filter Bubble Effect

The main point that can be captured
from the role of social media and its relation
to the current state of digital society is access
to information. The access generates several
advantages and challenges like statement of
Dr. William Tayeebwa before. There are many
advantages gained when using social media,
information from different regions and even
countries that are so abundant, long distance
communication is made easier, and so on. But

105 UALTNTTTITTTTTTTT TTT @JoP

JURNAL ILMU SOSIAL
DAN ILMU POLITIK
Jurnal IImu Sosial dan Ilmu Politik, Volume 22, Issue 2, November 2018

that is not less important to note here is, the
challenge of using social media itself. In one
aspect, William mentions that the challenge of
using social media is social media increasing
the trend of “information overload” which
makes it harder to filter out relevant and
useful information and can lead to “social
fragmentation” and “digital isolation”. The
information is so abundant that it makes it
more difficult for people to distinguish what
is right, what is wrong, and what is useful
to them. Moreover through the click and like
features, social media is able to present similar
information based solely on the interests or
likes of users, without considering the truth.
This condition is very dangerous. Referring
to William’s terms, when a person consumes
similar information or only based on single
point of view continuously, he will experience
digital isolation or can be said as a filter bubble
effect.

In 2011, Eli Parisier released The Filter
Bubble: What the Internet Is Hiding From You. In
this book, Parisier explains how the internet
search engines and their algorithms are creating
asituation where users increasingly are getting
information that confirms their prior beliefs
(In Holone, 2016, p. 298). Adam (2017, para.
10) also explains that Eli Pariser, an internet
activist, look no harmful irregularities of the
system algorithms. The algorithm eventually
create a “big bubble” that makes someone
intellectually isolated. That is, when a person
never see a different perspective of another
person, then it is likely he is to drag on very
large in its own judgment.

Prakash (2016, p. 18321) confirms this
opinion that filter bubble is the result of web
personalization and as a result the user get
isolated from the views which he did not
agree. The problem which lies here is that
the user’s likes and dislikes are guessed by
algorithms which apply personalized search
and sometimes relevant information for the
user may be hided. Therefore, Prakash (2016,

DAN ILMU POLITIK

p. 18321) describes what he meant by web
personalization. Web personalization is the
process of customizing a website to the needs
of each specific user or set of users, taking
advantage of the knowledge acquired through
the analysis of the user’s navigational behavior.
Integrating usage data with content, structure,
or user profile data enhances the results of the
personalization process. Ultimately, we can say
that web personalization is done to provide
each user their personal web.

What is meant by Prakash above can
be felt through a number of social media like
Instagram, YouTube, and Facebook. According
to Guy et al., (2010, p. 194), in recent years, quite
a few personalized recommendation services
for social media have emerged. For instance,
StumbleUpon] is a personalized recommender
engine that suggests web pages based on a
user’s past ratings, ratings by friends, ratings
by users with similar interests, and topics of
interest selected by the user from a list of nearly
500 subjects.

The term of filter bubble, has a similar
meaning to black hole. Black hole is the online
isolated field of communication where critical
views and transparency are avoided. It is used
to describe relatively closed social networks
representing particular viewpoints on health
(anti-vaccination), society (Anders Behring
Breivik, white supremacy, and similar), religion
(apocalyptic visions in relation to on-going
incidents, for example, the last Ebola breakout
or AIDS in the 1980s) (Hansen et al., 2017, p. 81)

Previous research in this regard
explained that the search history is more
effective in providing information to the user
recommendation. It means that when we write
a keyword in the search field, social media will
record the traces are then such information will
emerge in our social media pages. Or it could
just as in the case above, a click on a particular
post, subsequent postings from the same source
or the like will continue until there are no clicks
from us. Freyne et al. (2010, p. 280), in a journal

EOP. TET ETT 116
Arina Rohmatul Hidayah, Persecution Act as Filter Bubble Effect: Digital Society and The Shift of Public Sphere

Social Networking Feeds: Recommending Items of
Interest, shows that harnessing the browsing
patterns of users, what and whom they view,
are more accurate predictors of relevance than
what actions they carry out or with whom they
communicate.

Persecution Act in Social Media

As result of filter bubble, many
persecutions act in social media. Just based
on his point of view, it is not uncommon
for anyone to commit a persecution against
another person or group. Persecution term is
defined in Indonesian dictionary as hunting
arbitrary one or a number of residents, and
hurt, be troubled, or crushed (www.kbbi-web.
id, 2017, para. 1). Rohmatin (2016, p. 134) also
pressure the same thing, namely maltreatment
systematic persecution committed by an
individual or a group against other groups.
Reinforced by Gummow J, the action of
persecuting or pursuing with enmity and
malignity: the infliction of death, torture or
penalties for adherence to a religious belief
or an opinion as such, with a view to the
repression or extirpation of it; the fact of being
persecuted; an instance of this... (in Vrachnas,
et al., 2012, p. 227).

Of the three opinions above are similarities
in defining acts of persecution. Some of the
points that should be highlighted is related
to the mistreatment of persecution against
individuals or groups and there is an effort both
physical and psychological harm. It is quite
possible to do in social media that defines as
“medium in internet that enable users to present
and express their selves or to interact, to work
together, to share, to communicate with other
users and building social bounding virtually”
(Nasrullah, 2015, as cited in Jamilah et al., 2016,
p. 924). When someone has a belief or ideology
that is opposed to the ideology of others and
want to make it the same, it would be easy to
do through social media. And persecution is a
negative step to get those similarities.

Public Sphere and Actor Rational Action

Based on some theories above, from
social media and society in the digital age, filter
bubble effect and persecution act, it should be
underlined that all this cannot be separated
from the public sphere theory of Habermas.
What makes the author’s reason link some
of these concepts with the concept of public
sphere is the existence and role of social media.
Social media is a form of public sphere in
this era. Therefore, social media has fulfilled
the criteria of public sphere that is meant by
Habermas, namely the public sphere must be
open and accessible to all, and in the public
sphere of all has equal voice, with influence
determined by the force of reason.

Social media provides an opportunity
for anyone to participate and express an
opinion. Moreover, in social media there is no
categorization of whether they are government
officials or ordinary people, all have the right
to argue. Unfortunately, though structurally,
social media has conformity to the concept
of public space, substantially, it is not. The
public sphere of Habermas emphasizes
rationality in expressing opinions. There
are various reasons and points of view put
forward, thus creating a critical discussion,
the best argument that will be taken. But not
so with social media as the public sphere
today. Through the concept of a bubble filter
proposed by Eli Pariser, social media can lead
one to isolate in his own viewpoint. And,
ultimately, the condition triggers the act of
persecution against another person or group
that is a reflection of the condition of society
in the digital age today.

The relationship between the public
space and the actors’ rational actions is clearly
described by Gunaratne (2006, pp. 6-7). He
emphasized the battle between the lifeworld
realm and system sphere. The system is a
territory controlled by state or government
forces that have a policy with lifeworld domains
filled by the public with critical argument

107 VNNTTUTTTTTETTTETT TET @JoP

JURNAL ILMU SOSIAL
DAN ILMU POLITIK
Jurnal IImu Sosial dan Ilmu Politik, Volume 22, Issue 2, November 2018

through discussion in the public space.
Eventually, Habermas (1981/1984) developed
the notion of communicative rationality based
on an in-depth reading of what he originally
termed “universal” pragmatics and implanted
the public sphere in the lifeworld realm, as
opposed to the system realm, of society built
into his communicative action theory (as cited
in Gunaratne, 2006, p. 6). From the explanation,
it can be said that the lifeworld aspect consists
of civil society who conducts critical dialogue
or social dialogue through its communicative
action in correction or even against state
policy, while in the realm of system, filled by
governmental authority, using instrumental
or strategic action rationality to impose his
interest in society in the lifeworld realm.
Therefore, in his explanation, Gunaratne (2005,
p. 7) mentions that this uncoupling gave rise to
the pathologies of modernity, or “colonization
of the lifeworld”.

Methods

The research method used is literature
research. Literature research methodology is
to read through, analyze and sort literatures
in order to identify the essential attribute of
materials. Its significant difference from other
methodologies is that it does not directly
deal with the object under study, but to
indirectly access to information from a variety
of literatures, which is generally referred to as
“non-contact method” (Lin, 2009, p. 179). Based
on the concept, the initial step of this paper is to
formulate the first topic to be discussed. Then
look for related theories or literature to answer
and analyze the topic.

Result

Of the several theories already mentioned
and based on the literature research method
used by the author, then the following are
the results obtained through the correlation
between theories to answer the issues to be
discussed later.

DAN ILMU POLITIK

Persecution Act in Social Media as Filter
Bubble Effect: Overview of Digital Society
Today

Referring to the statement Gummow
that the action of persecuting or pursuing with
enmity and malignity: the infliction of death,
torture or penalties for adherence to a religious
belief or an opinion as such, with a view to the
repression or extirpation of it; the fact of being
persecuted; an instance of this... (in Vrachnas
et al., 2012, p. 227). Compliance with the beliefs
or opinions referred to above may be due to
personalization of the web on social media
or the so-called bubble effect filter. When we
like or click a post, then on the next occasion
the posting of the account reappears on our
media homepage. Until finally the information
bias occurs. As an explanation of Eli Parisier
in The Filter Bubble: What The Internet Is Hiding
From You that the internet search engines and
their algorithms are creating a situation where
users increasingly are getting information
that confirms their prior beliefs (Holone,
2016, p. 298). Luckily if the information
contains a positive charge. If, on the contrary,
one tends to follow continuously radical or
extremist information, he may commit an act of
persecution through hoaxes or other means, to
equate views. Related to this, Nukman Luthfie,
a social media observer, told to www.bbc.com
(2017, para. 9), “the core algorithm is the fun of
the user, so if we use our Facebook it’s actually,
in our time line it’s contents that’s it. Although
we have 5000 friends for example, our time
line content is the person-that’s it. Content and
friends, we often respond to, whether we like
and we reply or content we share. “

Persecution act as a filter bubble effect
is explained by Setiawan (2017, pp. 292-293)
from the standpoint of communication barriers.
He referred to the opinion of Onong Uchjana
Effendy (2003) that communication barriers
occur due to several things:

Firstly, mechanical disturbances in which
the occurrence of interference in communication

EOP. TETTED TET 118
Arina Rohmatul Hidayah, Persecution Act as Filter Bubble Effect: Digital Society and The Shift of Public Sphere

channels or physical noise, this interference ismore
towards the medium used in communicating, like
a double voice on radio because of the waves that
coincide, or the boisterous noise of the audience
when people make a speech.

Secondly, because of semantic disorder.
This type of disorder is concerned with the
notion of actual words or changes in the
meaning of words. Symbols of the same words
have different meanings for different people.

Thirdly, because of interest (interest).
Factors of interest will also hinder effective
communication, because the importance of the
communicant that makes the communicant
will be selective in receiving and responding to
messages. People will be aroused by messages
that become their needs.

Fourthly, barriers due to motivation
(motivation). The motivation factor of the
communicant will also affect the level of
awareness, attention, and stimulus to the
message conveyed by the communicator. More
appropriate, the message with one’s motivation,
higher the level of intensity and attention.

Fifthly, the obstacle due to prejudice.
Prejudice is a severe obstacle to the
communication process, if not anything
communicant has been suspicious both to
communicators and messages to be delivered,
the the communication will not run effectively.

The five obstacles presented above, two
of which can be used as one of the causes
of the emergence of the persecution act as a
filter bubble effect. Departing from ignorance
of anything, one can take sides due to the
personalization of the web. So when they
already have a certain belief or view, they will
be more selective in choosing information to
strengthen it. And this is what is meant by
Onong as a factor of interest and motivation.
Communication is not effective because
someone tends to ignore information that is
not in accordance with the interests and needs.

From that condition, it falls into the
challenges of using new media technologies

as defined by Dr. William Tayeebwa that
social media has increasingly become a
channel for different forms of offenses and
so-called “cybercrime” - such as “cyber-
bullying”, stalking, defamation, spread of
false information and inciting messages, and
social media increase the trend of “information
overload” which makes it harder to filter out
relevant and useful information and can lead to
“social fragmentation” and “digital isolation”
(Kamp, 2016, p. 8). Spreading false information,
inciting through messages, and digital isolation
is the trigger of filter bubble effect in social
media, a person or a particular group can freely
spread its ideology, like a radical ideology that
causes persecution of others. Nath (2009, p.
5) confirms this by stating, the exchanges of
information in these instances through an ICT
infrastructure. According to Nath, or a more
radical idea of information super highways,
largely facilitated by technology have been the
basic tenet of an information society.

Social change of society as a result of the
use of new media, has been predicted by Martin
Bangemann that that the information society
is “the revolution based on the information,
which is a picture of human knowledge”
(Bangemann 1994 as cited in Becla, 2012, p.
126). With information, people create their
own world though not necessarily true. This
condition is attached to the term “post-truth”,
which explains how in the information age,
truth is often ruled out. Post-truth is an
adjective defined as ‘relating to or denoting
circumstances in which objective facts are
less influential in shaping public opinion
than appeals to emotion and personal belief
(Lambert, 2016, p. 63). In addition, in www.
remotivi.or.id (2017) it is explained that Ralph
Keyes in his book The Post-truth Era (2004)
and comedian Stephen Colber popularized the
term related to post-truth that is more or less
truthiness as something as if true, though not
true at all. Excessive information and social
media’s ability to select information based

JURNAL ILMU SOSIAL
DAN ILMU POLITIK

119 TALTTNTTTITT TTT TTT TTT @JoP
Jurnal IImu Sosial dan Ilmu Politik, Volume 22, Issue 2, November 2018

on user preferences leads them to a digital
isolation, a bias of facts and reality. This is
the condition of today’s digital society. And
the persecution act becomes a proof. Both
extremist and private groups with deep-rooted
convictions tend to do so. The important role
of social media as an interactive medium that
is easily accessible every day and even every
second, increases the likelihood for individuals
or groups to resist other truths. According
to Lambert (2016, p. 63), scholars have tried
to explain the factors that have caused this
phenomenon of post-truth. The easy access
to social media, blogs and internet stories are
largely to blame.

The Substantial Shift of Public Sphere and
Actor Rational Action

When associated with Juergen
Habermas’s public sphere concept, the first
requirement is that public sphere must be open
and accessible to all. In it, there is a critical
discussion in response to public issues. This is
relevant when associated with digital media.
Introducing people to the internet brings a
structural shift in the public sphere, especially
its geographical aspects. Discussions and
critical debates that are central components of
the Habermas concept can be undertaken by
various circles with no limited distance and
time. If Habermas describes the public sphere
with a forum where many people gather
and discuss together, then in the context of
new media today, people in one area with
another can do so as if they meet face-to-face.
According to Crack (2007), the contemporary
information society and knowledge industries
are characterized with the removal of all the
temporal and spatial barriers to distanced
communication with the help of information
communication technologies (ICTs). A
structural precondition of transnational public
spheres is communicative networks to enable
broad participation across state borders (Khan
et al. 2012, p. 44). The new public sphere is

DAN ILMU POLITIK

emerging out of the digital gadgets starting
from a ‘computer’ then connecting them into
‘Network’, which started within a building,
then cities, states and finally ‘global-networks’
came up with the gadget of ‘Internet’, a global
platform giving every citizen an opportunity to
become an ‘international-citizen’ (Chan & Lee,
2007, in Khan et al., 2012, p. 44).
Unfortunately, when viewed in the
current context, social media as a part of digital
media, it causes a substantial shift in the public
sphere through filter bubble effect that removes
dialogue and critical discussion and finally
the act of persecution is easily done. Social
media keeps them chained at their own point
of view without any discussion or debate with
other points of view by consuming the same
information continuously in social media,
especially negative information, can cause a
person or group to be provoked to have the
same point of view so as to enable them to
commit in violence or intimidation against
others. Especially when the layman who does
not know anything, with the exposure is so
strong, can be made believe. They will not seek
to prove or compare with other information and
sources. Though the truth was obtained from
the objective search results as a form of critical
discussion from the users of social media. Such
statements of Gooch (2017, p. 14), in fact, truth
requires the analysis of objective facts and a
discussion of the evidence—requirements that
bestow it with great value which professionals
in any field have a duty to preserve.
Responding to this problem, Fuchs (2014,
p. 61) attributed it to capitalism. He states that
capitalism is the basis for the emergence of
modern society. Social media, like Facebook,
Twitter, WhatsApp, and all its types, can not
be separated from those influences. With the
initial goal of profit, global media companies
have managed to reach out and attract markets
across the country. Capital domination then
penetrates to state autonomy and culminates
in the private authority of civil society. That

EOP. HTTE TTT 120
Arina Rohmatul Hidayah, Persecution Act as Filter Bubble Effect: Digital Society and The Shift of Public Sphere

means, the presence of digital media makes
people have full authority over public issues.
And this is the characteristic of modern society.

The point that needs to be underlined
from statement above is that in modern society,
they have power over the means, including
social media, allowing them to control the
movement of information. Information on
public issues is widely disseminated in social
media which then through the media, public
opinion and ideology can be directed by certain
parties according to their interests. Therefore,
Fuchs (2014, p. 61) adds that as modern society
is based on structures of accumulation and a
separation of roles within different realms,
there are conflicts of interest over the control
of property, collective decisions and meanings
that can result in social struggles. Economic,
political and cultural roles in modern society
are organized in the form of classes, parties
and political groups, and communities of
interest that compete over the control of
property/surplus, collective decision, and social
meanings.

The relevance of the concept proposed by
Fuchs above with the main issue in this paper
lies in the different situations. If something is
public, it is “open to all” (Habermas, 1991, p.
1). The task of a public sphere is that society
can become engaged in “critical public debate”
(Habermas, 1991, p. 52). The public sphere
would therefore require media for information
and communication and access by all citizens.
The logic of the public sphere is independent
of economic and political power (Habermas,
1991, p. 36): “Laws of the market (...) (are)
suspended as were laws of the state” Habermas
thereby stresses that the public sphere is not
just a sphere of public political communication,
but also a sphere free from state censorship
and from private ownership. It is free from
particularistic controls (as cited in Fuchs, 2014,
p- 60).

The concept proposed by Habermas
above is in a situation where capital forces

have not yet dominated the global market.
The mass media that existed at that time has
not mobilized the public to have the authority
and even the full power over the choice of
information. So, Habermas still emphasizes
the independence and neutrality of the public
sphere, without the political economic interests
in it. Unlike the condition of modern society
today. Social media as a representation of public
sphere in the digital age, no longer neutral.
Social media can take sides, depending on the
interests of the consumer. When they want
to affirm their belief, social media is able to
provide supportive information. Conversely,
when they want to influence others to be equal
to their beliefs and interests, social media is also
able to provide that facility.

Thus, the critical debate in Habermas’s
public sphere leading to consensus, the
best argument to be accepted, has shifted.
Habermas's shadow is a group of people sitting
together, conducting discussions to reach a
consensus on public affairs. But what happens
now is social media as a public sphere, it is very
easy to present a variety of information by only
loading one point of view according to user
preferences and through click and like method.
In fact, if adjusted to the ideal concept of public
sphere, although there are features of click
and like, social media should remain neutral
(not only neutral from global interests or the
state, but also personal or group interests)
by providing facilities for information from
various points of view can emerge. They will
be trained to choose which information is true
and not the absolute truth, according to their
own convictions.

Previously, it has been explained that
there is a shift in the concept of public sphere,
according to Habermas with the current
context. The public sphere in question can
be attributed to the actor’s rational action it
installs. Habermas’s conviction that human
action or social interaction within a society does
not occur arbitrarily but is essentially rational

JURNAL ILMU SOSIAL
DAN ILMU POLITIK

120 VUNTTVTETTTTETTTTETT TET @JoP
Jurnal IImu Sosial dan Ilmu Politik, Volume 22, Issue 2, November 2018

(Hardiman, 2009, p. 34). Among the two types
of rational action are instrumental rationality
and communicative rationality, debates and
critical conversations to reach a consensus
on the basis of the best argument included
in communicative rationality. While the act
of persecution and the facilities provided by
social media in creating a bubble effect filter is
an instrumental rationality.

Although equally included in rational
action, according to Hardiman (2009, p. 36),
in strategic action people use language not as
a medium of understanding, but as a tool to
impose the will. A tool for imposing will through
words or even violence can be used to generate
consensus. But one can not recognize such
consensus as legitimate. It is for this reason that
Habermas considers communicative actions
(Handeln’s kommunikatives)-means: actions
directed at consensus-more fundamental than
strategic action to produce social coordination
mechanisms. For indeed in rationality or
communicative action, there is a discussion of
claims of validity, which includes truth claims,
honesty and accuracy (Hardiman, 2009, p. 37).

In the public sphere there should be discussion
from multiple points of view, rather than
highlighting personal beliefs and rejecting the
other truth.

If the picture above shows how the
consensus consists of several claims, then it
is not so in instrumental rationality. Someone
affected by filter bubble in social media
and finally dare to act persecution, only in
the subjective world itself. One example is
explained by Azali (2017, p. 5) that the FPI
members and sympathisers have grown savvy
in using digital media to systematically identify
and harass those they disagree with, both
online and offline. In this condition, a person
judges something only from his perspective
does not seek to find other evidence (claims
of truth) nor confirm to various parties (claims
of accuracy). So it can be said that social
media as a public sphere can be a container
of instrumental rationality. Habermas (1984,
p. 285) talks about instrumental action as a
nonsocial action oriented towards success or
control (as cited in Kernstock & Brexendorf,
2009, p. 395).

Figure 1.
In a communication taken three kinds of performative attitude toward the world.
Consensus can be achieved only if all three validity claims that simultaneously met.

   

 

 

CLAIMS HONESTY

 

 

 

SUBJECTIVE WORLD
(INDIVIDUAL)

 

 

CLAIMS PRECISION

 

 

Source: Hardiman, F., B. (2009, p. 37)

€JoP MUU INIATTTELLLLLLIMMHIEELLL 222

JURNAL ILMU SOSIAL
DAN ILMU POLITIK
Arina Rohmatul Hidayah, Persecution Act as Filter Bubble Effect: Digital Society and The Shift of Public Sphere

Discussion

From the above theoretical explanation,
it can be attributed to one big case that has just
been the world’s attention is about the theft of
Facebook user data by Cambridge Analytica.
There are two cases behind Cambridge Analytica
stealing user data. Facebook is Donald Trump’s
winning campaign in the 2016 presidential
election of the United States and affecting users
in the Brexit referendum. In the Trump case, for
example on www.nytimes.com website explained
that Cambridge Analytica, a political data
firm hired by President Trump’s 2016 election
campaign, gained access to private information
on more than 50 million Facebook users. The firm
offered tools that could identify the personalities
of American voters and their influence behavior
(Granville, 2018, para. 2). Also, it was added by
www.theguardian.com that a wholly-owned
company has revealed to the Observer how
Cambridge Analytica - a company owned by
the hedge fund billionaire, Robert Mercer, and
headed at the time by Trump’s key adviser,
Steve Bannon - used personal information taken
without authorization early 2014 to build a
system that could profile individual US voters, in
order to target them with personalized political
advertisements (Cadwalladr & Harrison, 2018,
para. 2).

Both cases explain how social media as
a public sphere that basically has a concept
about the occurrence of critical and rational
discussion actually makes someone shackled
in his own belief and truth. And Trump’s case
is one proof that by putting a pro ad for Trump
on Facebook, it can increase the number of
supporters and ultimately give the victory to the
presidential election. The public who initially did
not understand or did not even support Trump
with such powerful media exposure, made them
turn to support (it must be admitted that for US
presidential election 2016, Facebook is very subtle
in shaping polarization in society).

And just like any other election, when
the public has made a choice, let alone fanatical

of a certain character allows them to do
everything, including persecution act, one
of which is manifested through fake news in
social media. Allcott & Gentzkow (2017, p.
212) writes that following the 2016 election,
a specific concern has been the effect of false
stories - “fake news” as it has been dubbed-
circulated in social media. Recent evidence
shows that: 1) 62% of US adults get news on
social media (Gottfried and Shearer 2016); 2)
the most popular font news mainstream news
stories (Silverman 2016); 3) many people who
see them (Silverman and Singer-Vine 2016); and
4) the most discussed font news stories tended
to favor Donald Trump over Hillary Clinton
(Silverman 2016). Putting these facts together,
anumber of commentators have suggested that
(Parkinson’s 2016; Read 2016; Dewey 2016).

This case can be attributed to Fuchs’s
theory of connecting modern society with
the present presence of social media with
capitalism. Habermas, with the concept
of public sphere that emphasizes critical
discussion see the public sphere is still within
the neutral limit. While Fuchs judge that in
the modern era, especially with the social
media, political economy has entered into it.
So if Habermas creates a public sphere with
his communicative actions as opposed to the
system realm, it is now likely to shift to the
control of the capitalist side. That means there is
a tendency of the system realm to be dominant
over the lifeworld realm. And this is not in line
with the original intention that Habermas’s
critical theory is an attempt to emancipate the
lifeworld from system “colonization” through
the revival of an uncoerced and unrestricted
public sphere operating on the “universal”
pragmatics of communicative rationality
(Gunaratne, 2016, p. 7).

Conclusion

The filter bubble in social media is one
of the causes of persecution of someone or
group against someone and other groups.

JURNAL ILMU SOSIAL

123 UALTNTTINTTTTTTTTTTTT TTT @JoP

DAN ILMU POLITIK
Jurnal IImu Sosial dan Ilmu Politik, Volume 22, Issue 2, November 2018

The filter bubble takes place through web
personalization where the algorithm on social
media allows one to consume the information
they like only. So there is bias information in
it. When viewed from the context of today’s
digital society, the condition is a revolution
based on information. Information has brought
so great a change, not only in the geographical
domain by melding distance and time, but
also changing all aspects of life, especially in
terms of the mindset and ideology of society.
Post-truth era becomes a proof that someone
can be shackled in the beliefs and ideologies it
creates itself.

While in the concept of public sphere,
Habermas, which emphasizes on rationality
and critical discussion among members, the
phenomenon that occurs now actually shows
a substantial shift. With the filter bubble effect,
it can be said there is no critical discussion
conducted by someone or a particular group.
They take for granted information on social
media without compromising, confirming, or
seeking other evidence to support their beliefs.
The substantial shift can also be attributed
to the actors’ rational actions. Habermas in
the concept of public sphere, wants a critical
discussion of validity claims that include
claims of accuracy, truth, and honesty. This
action he then calls communicative rationality.
Discussions that lead to consensus without
coercion from others. Unlike the case with
social media as a public sphere today. Social
media actually provides facilities for the
occurrence of strategic action or instrumental
rationality, a control effort of someone to have
others have the same ideology with him.
Although there has been no empirical research,
this article tries to offer anew discussion about
the function of social media as a public sphere
and all the attributes of action in it. Therefore,
the suggestion for the future is that further
research is needed in this regard to obtain
strong evidence and objective facts on the
ground.

References

Adam, A. (2017). Filter bubble: Sisi gelap
algoritma media sosial. Retrieved
December 17, 2017, from https://tirto.id/
filter-bubble-sisi-gelap-algoritma-media-
sosial-cwSU

Allcott, H., & Gentzkow, M. (2017). Social
media and fake news in the 2016 election.
Journal of Economic Perspective, 31(2), 211-
236. doi: =10.1257/jep.31.2.211

Arti Persekusi. (2017, December 17). Retrieved
from https://kbbi.web.id/persekusi

Azali, K. (2017). Fake news and increased
persecution in Indonesia. ISEAS Yusof
Ishak Institute, 61, 1-10. Retrieved from
https://www.iseas.edu.sg/images/pdf/
ISEAS_Perspective_2017_61.pdf

Bank, N., Z. (2014). Social media and its effects
on individuals and social system. Human
Capital Without Borders: Knowledge and
Learning for Quality of Life. International
Conference. Retrieved from http://www.
toknowpress.net/ISBN/978-961-6914-09-
3/papers/ML14-714.pdf

Becla, A. (2012). Information society
and knowledge-based economy-
Development level and the main barriers
-some remarks. Interdisciplinary Approach
to Economics and Sociology, 5(1), 125-132.

Bozdag, E. & Hoven, J. v. d. (2015). Breaking The
Filter Bubble: Democracy and Design.
Ethics Inf. Technol, 1-17. doi: 10.1007/
$10676-015-9380-y.

Cadwalladr, C. & Harrison, E., G. (2018).
Revealed: 50 Million Facebook Profiles
Harvested for Cambridge Analytica in
Major Data Breach. Retrieved May 7,
2018, from https://www.theguardian.
com/news/2018/mar/17/cambridge-
analytica-Facebook-influence-us-
election

Caplan, R. & Boyd, D. (2016). Who
Controls the Public Sphere in An

Mediation,

Automation, Power, 1-19. Retrieved

Era of Algorithms?.

EOP. PETE ETT 124

DAN ILMU POLITIK
Arina Rohmatul Hidayah, Persecution Act as Filter Bubble Effect: Digital Society and The Shift of Public Sphere

from https://datasociety.net/pubs/ap/
MediationAutomationPower_2016.pdf

Charles, G.,-U. & Rohwer, L., F. (2015).
Habermas, the Public Sphere, and the
Creation of a Racial Counterpublic.
Michigan Journal of Race and Law, 21(1),
1-21. Retrieved from https://repository.
law.umich.edu/cgi/viewcontent.
cgi?referer=https://www.google.co.id/&
httpsredir=1 &article=1048&context=mjrl

Debora, Y. (2017). Kronologi kasus dugaan
penistaan agama. Retrieved May 1, 2018,
from https://tirto.id/kronologi-kasus-
dugaan-penistaan-agama-b457

Facebook FPI Picu Kekerasan atau Menyebar
Pesan Kemanusiaan?. Retrieved January
31, 2018, from www.bbc.com/indonesia/
indonesia-42442733

Fuchs, C. (2014). Social media and the public
sphere. Triple C, 12 (1), 57-101. Retrieved
from http://www.triple-c.at/index.php/
tripleC/article/viewFile/552/529

Freyne, J., Daly, E., M., Berkovsky, S., &
Geyer, W. (2010). Social networking
feeds: Recommending items of interest.
Proceedings of the 2010 ACM Conference
on Recommender Systems, 277-280. doi:
10.1145/ 1864708.1864766

Gooch, A. (2017). In pursuit of the truth. In
UNO Magazine “The Post-Truth Era:
Reality vs. Perception” (pp. 14-15). Spain:
Llorente & CUENCA.

Granville, K. (2018). Facebook and Cambridge
Analytica: What you need to know
as fallout widens. Retrieved May
7, 2018, from https://www.nytimes.
com/2018/03/19/technology/Facebook-
cambridge-analytica-ex plained html

Gual, M. (2017). Korban persekusi ‘The Ahok
Effect’ tercatat mencapai 59 orang.
Retrieved December 17, 2017, from
https://www.cnnindonesia.com/
nasional/20170601163649-20-218744/
korban-persekusi-the-ahok-effect-
tercatat-mencapai-59-orang/.

Gunaratne, S. A. (2006). Public sphere and
communicative rationality: Interrogating
Habermas's Eurocentrism. Journalism &
Mass Communication Monographs, 8(2).
4-115. doi: 10.1177/152263790600800201

Guy, I, Zwerdling, N., Ronen, I., Carnel,
D., & Uziel, E. (2010). Social media
recommendation based on people and
tags. SIGIR. Retrieved from https://www.
research.ibm.com/haifa/dept/imt/papers/
guySIGIR10.pdf

Hansen, H., A., Bjorktomta, S., B., & Svalastog,
L. (2017). Digital Society generates
New Challenges On Child Welfare
Services. Croat Med Journal, 58, 80-83.
Retrieved from http://neuron.mefst.hr/
docs/CMJ/issues/2017/58/1/cmj_58_1_
hansen_28252879.pdf

Hardiman, F., B. (2009). Demokrasi Deliberatif:
Menimbang Negara Hukum dan Ruang
Publik dalam Teori Diskursus Jurgen
Habermas. Yogyakarta: Kanisius.

Holone, H. (2016). The filter bubble and its effect
on online personal health information.
Croatian Medical Journal, 57(3), 298-301.
doi:10.3325/cmj.2016.57.298

Jamilah, I., Akbar, K., F., Gunawan, M.,
A., & Marantika, S. (2016). Political
communication, social media, and public
sphere: An analysis to a phenomenon
in Bandung towards Smart City.
International Journal of Social Science and
Humanity, 6(12), 923-928. doi: 10.18178/
ijssh.2016.6.12.774

Kamp, M. (Ed.). (2016). Reality Check Assessing
The Impact of Social Media on Political
Communication and Civic Engagement
in Uganda. Uganda: Konrad Adenaur
Stiftung:

Kernstock, J. & Brexendorf, T., O. (2009).
Implications of Habermas's “theory of
communicative action” for corporate brand
management. Corporate Communications:
An International Journal, 14(4), 389-403.
doi: 10.1108/13563280910998745

JURNAL ILMU SOSIAL

125 UALTUTTNTTITTT TTT TTT @JoP

DAN ILMU POLITIK
Jurnal IImu Sosial dan Ilmu Politik, Volume 22, Issue 2, November 2018

Khan, M., Z., Gilani, I, S., & Nawaz, A. (2012).
From Habermas model to new public
sphere: A paradigm shift. Global Journal of
Human Social Science, 12(5), 42-52.

Laidlaw, E., B. (2017). Online Shaming and The
Right to Privacy. Journal of Laws, 6(3), 1-26.
doi: 10.3390/laws6010003

Lambert, M. (2016). Post-truth era and impact
on the science associated with sport and
exercise medicine. S Afr J Sports Med,
28(3), 63. doi: 10.17159/2078-516X/2016/
v28i3a1838

Lin, G. (2009). Higher Education Research
Methodology-Literature Method.
International Education Studies, 2(4), 179-181.

Prakash, S. (2016). Filter Bubble: How to Burst
Your Filter Bubble. International Journal Of
Engineering And Computer Science, 5(10),
18321-18325. doi: 10.18535/ijecs/v5i10.15

Rohmatin, T. (2016). Nilai-Nilai Pluralisme dalam
Buku Pendidikan Agama Islam (PAI)

untuk Sekolah Menengah Atas (SMA). [imu
Ushuluddin, 3(1), 133-152.

Selamat Datang di Era Post-Truth. (2017,
January 17). Retrieved from www.
remotivi.or.id/kabar/345/Selamat-
Datang-di-Era-Post-Truth.

Setiawan, I. (2017). Kajian Yuridis terhadap
Persekusi. Jurnal Ilmiah Galuh Justisi,
5(2), 291-299.

Vrachnas, J., Bagaric, M., Athula, P., &
Dimoploulos, P. (2012). Migration and
Refugee Law: Principles and Practice in
Australia (3° Ed.). New York: Cambridge
University Press.

Yetkinel, O. & Colak, M. (2017). The Effects of
Transformation of Public Sphere with
the New Media in Academy. EURASIA
Journal of Mathematics Science and
Technology Education, 13(8), 5009-5018.
doi: 10.12973/eurasia.2017.00979a

EOP. HET ETE 126

DAN ILMU POLITIK
