Pop the Feed Filter Bubble: Making Reddit Social Media a VR Cityscape

Rhema Linder* Alexandria M. Stacy?

Texas A&M University

ABSTRACT

On Reddit, users from tens of thousands of communities create and
promote internet content, including pictures, videos, news, memes,
and creative writing. However, like most social media feeds, sub-
scribing to a very small subset of available content creates filter
bubbles. These bubbles, while created unintentionally, skew percep-
tions of reality. This phenomena provides an impetus for researchers
to design techniques breaking out of filter bubbles. Virtual real-
ity provides opportunities for new environments that contextualize
social media among multiple perspectives. We present one solu-
tion to the filter bubble problem: Blue Link City, which enables
contextualized exploration of Reddit.

1. INTRODUCTION AND RELATED WORK

On Reddit, users from tens of thousands of communities create and
promote internet content, including pictures, videos, news, memes,
and creative writing. As consumers of content, users can sub-
scribe to specific communities that match their tastes. However,
this potentially creates a “filter bubble”, where the targeted con-
tent users enjoy fosters skewed perceptions of what most people
believe. Like most social media, Reddit uses subscription-based
feeds that present content in linear lists, ordered based on upvotes
and recency. Researchers have previously identified filter bubbles
on Twitter [6], which provides similar feeds. The filter bubble
problem also contributes to larger concerns about machine learn-
ing algorithms and their potential to unwittingly reinforce social
inequality [11]. This project seeks to call attention to the filter bub-
ble problem and presents our approach for mitigation. We discuss
and demonstrate an alternative to linear feeds for consuming social
media. Blue Link City is a virtual reality environment that maps
communities from Reddit into a virtual cityscape.

1.1. Presence in VR and Casual Browsing

In Virtual Reality research, presence [2] is the subjective feeling
of being lost in the moment or the reality of the system. Casual
web browsing creates a similar sense of presence. Elsweiler et al.
describes Casual-Leisure contexts as having separate goals than stan-
dard Information Behavior Models [5]. They found that people seek
out mood boosters in everyday situations, accepting many informa-
tional outcomes rather than having a particular goal or informational
need. We emphasize the exploring for the experience use case from
Elsweiler et al., which typically refers to exploring novel physical
spaces where the goal is to learn about the space. In this leisurely
context context, the focus is about the experience itself instead of an
informational goal.

1.2 Reddit and Other Social Media Feeds

Reddit is a link and text sharing social media site where individual
posts are constantly shifting in importance and prominence based
on votes from users [13]. One of the key aspects of Reddit is
that it is organized into hundreds of thousands of topic specific
subreddit groups. Each post is voted on by users to impact its “hot”

*e-mail: {rhema,nic,andruid} @ecologylab.net
te-mail: alstacy2323 @ gmail.com
*e-mail: ragan@tamu.edu

Nic Lupfer*
Interface Ecology Lab, Computer Science Department

Andruid Kerne* Eric D. Ragan?

Department of Visualization
Texas A&M University

score and current placement [14]. One thing Facebook, Twitter,
Pinterest, and Reddit have in common is that they all use a feed-
based subscription model. Content is prioritized with algorithms and
be scrolled through. While displaying content in lists has advantages,
non-linear spatial arrangements better support finding emergent and
creative connections among content [8, 15] and conceptualization
through visual thinking [10]. In 3D environments, meaningfully
spatialized information is ideal for learning activities [12]. This
spatialization helps people remember and learn automatically, which
we find to be better than linear feeds. Social media exploration
is a personally meaningful form of creativity where more diverse
experiences can be considered more creative [7]. We suggest that
helping contextualize content mitigates filter bubble effects.

2 BLUE LINK CITY

To create the cityscape structure, we start with data from Reddit,
construct a graph that connects related subreddits in a force-directed
graph, use an interactive application to create the city, and finally
export the structure into the virtual environment. For data from
Reddit, we used data from Woolf [16]. In this scheme, all subreddits
are represented as nodes, with edges between them representing
co-occurring comments from users. When a user comments at least
five times in two subreddits, a score of 1 is added. For example, there
are 621 users who commented five times in both /r/guns //firearm,
making an edge with a weight of 337 between nodes /r/guns and
/r/firearms. Using this data, we construct a graph in an interactive
web application that uses a D3.js visualization (Figure 1 a) to author
a cityscape. We mapped each node to a subreddit, and represented it
as a building. Once we were satisfied with our organization of the
city, we snapped the nodes in position to city blocks. We included
relatively large spacing between buildings to create a grid where the
virtual user can navigable through the city, and the overall effect
results in city blocks with a mix of larger and smaller subreddits.

We import the building structures into Unity to generate a
cityscape (Figure 1). The city structure takes advantage of net-
works [1] to support serendipity, while enabling non-linearity [8] in
the arrangement of curated subreddits. Each building represents a
subreddit. For each building, we place text titles of the name of its
subreddit at the top. Buildings display new content when looked at
(via head tracking) for more than three seconds. New posts appear
from the top of the building towards the ground. Each post wraps
around the building and shows a title and thumbnail image or “self”
text. The size of building are mapped to the number of the subred-
dit’s subscribers. Subreddits with few subscribers are narrow and
short, while those with many subscribers are wide and tall.

2.1 Interaction and Exploration

For hardware, we have used both a Leap Motion controller connected
to an Oculus Rift (see Figure 1 b) and the Oculus Touch controllers.
We developed a bimanual gesture technique for navigation in 3D
environments, which we describe very briefly in this work. To
translate, users clasp the fingers in each hand together and pull their
hands toward or away from the HMD. Spreading hands wider makes
the translation fast, while putting hands closer together makes it slow.
The accuracy of the Oculus Touch was much better than the Leap
motion. Overall, we found this to be an effective and natural-feeling
 

ga k Et i  (<),

Figure 1: In (a), the top shows initial force direct graph with the bottom showing a top down. For (b), we show the Leap Motion navigation. In (c),
we show a portion of Blue Link City, with a spatialized Reddit as a social media cityscape. In the VR application, users can fly around and browse
content up close, or from a distance. Demos and videos of the Blue Link City authoring tool and environment are available at bluelinkcity. com.

technique for exploration. It is “hyper-natural [3] in the sensation
of accelerated swimming beyond natural speeds.

In Blue Link City, a user can view subreddit buildings to see
fresh content appear. Often, this reveals interesting juxtapositions in
the structure of the city and posts. For example, one view shows a
subreddit about a popular show on Reddit (Rick and Morty), is jux-
taposed with /r/shittyaskscience and /r/talesfromtechsupport. This
indicates that, in this region of the city, people who comment about
the popular show also have a tendency to joke about science and
describe horror stories about supporting technology. Another prox-
imal juxtaposition shows that /r/SandersForPresident resides near
/cfsocialism, which are close but not as close to /r/polotics and
/cfthe_donald. In this virtual environment, browsing political posts
in nearby buildings juxtaposes content from posts that day from
multiple and conflicting perspectives.

3 DISCUSSION AND CONCLUSION

Virtual Reality feeds should be spatial. Linear feeds dominate social
media experiences on desktop and mobile platforms, but they also
strengthen filter bubbles. In positive instances, feeds expose people
to options they might not have otherwise found [9]. However, feeds
can lead people to feel that everyone agrees with their own ideas.
Cialdini’s work on social proof shows people change their expec-
tations based on how they see others behave [4]. Algorithms [11]
and individuals’ choices to subscribe to narrowly-sourced feeds are
both to blame. In order to help people overcome filter bubbles, it is
important offer multiple perspectives. In Blue Link City, different re-
gions of the spatialized community are shown simultaneously. Users
can move across these communities in any path while maintaining
a general sense of their orientation. In this way, we argue spatial
techniques are needed for VR for casual-leisure [5] browsing.

Use big data techniques to populate VR contextualized social
media environments. In our VR application, we used a combination
of force-directed layout and interaction to arrange the structure of
the city. We did not create the content manually, but relied on big
data methods to populate its content. We believe that linear feeds of
social media produce filter bubbles. VR environments can mitigate
this problem by contextualizing posts among multiple perspectives.
By design, the structure of Blue Link City juxtaposes content to help
encourage more creative [7] and contextualized exploration.

REFERENCES

[1] P. André, J. Teevan, S. T. Dumais, et al. Discovery is never by chance:
designing for (un) serendipity. In Proceedings of the seventh ACM
conference on Creativity and cognition, pp. 305-314. ACM, 2009.

[2]

[3]

[4]
[5]

[6

7]

[8]

[9

[10]

Qi

[12]

[13]

[14]

[15]

[16]

D. A. Bowman and R. P. McMahan. Virtual reality: how much immer-
sion is enough? Computer, 40(7):36-43, 2007.

D. A. Bowman, R. P. McMahan, and E. D. Ragan. Questioning natural-
ism in 3d user interfaces. Communications of the ACM, 55(9):78-88,
2012.

R. Cialdini. Influence. HarperCollins, 2009.

D. Elsweiler, M. L. Wilson, and B. Kirkegaard Lunn. Chapter 9
understanding casualleisure information behaviour. New Directions
in Information Behaviour, Emerald Group Publishing, Bingley, pp.
211-241, 2011.

I. Himelboim, S. McCreery, and M. Smith. Birds of a feather tweet
together: Integrating network and content analyses to examine cross-
ideology exposure on twitter. Journal of Computer-Mediated Commu-
nication, 18(2):40-60, 2013.

A. Jain, N. Lupfer, Y. Qu, R. Linder, A. Kerne, and S. M. Smith.
Evaluating tweetbubble with ideation metrics of exploratory browsing.
In Proceedings of the 2015 ACM SIGCHI Conference on Creativity
and Cognition, pp. 53-62. ACM, 2015.

A. Kerne, A. M. Webb, S. M. Smith, R. Linder, N. Lupfer, Y. Qu,
J. Moeller, and S. Damaraju. Using metrics of curation to evaluate
information-based ideation. ACM Transactions on Computer-Human
Interaction (TOCHD), 21(3):14, 2014.

R. Linder, C. Snodgrass, and A. Kerne. Everyday ideation: all of my
ideas are on pinterest. In Proc CHI, 2014.

N. Lupfer, A. Kerne, A. M. Webb, and R. Linder. Patterns of free-form
curation: Visual thinking with web content. In Proceedings of the 2016
ACM on Multimedia Conference, pp. 12-21. ACM, 2016.

C. O'Neil. Weapons of math destruction: How big data increases
inequality and threatens democracy. Crown Publishing Group (NY),
2016.

E. D. Ragan, D. A. Bowman, and K. J. Huber. Supporting cognitive pro-
cessing with spatial information presentations in virtual environments.
Virtual Reality, 16(4):301-314, 2012.

P. Singer, F. Flock, C. Meinhart, E. Zeitfogel, and M. Strohmaier. Evo-
lution of reddit: from the front page of the internet to a self-referential
community? In Proceedings of the 23rd International Conference on
World Wide Web, pp. 517-522. ACM, 2014.

P. Van Mieghem. Human psychology of common appraisal: The reddit
score. Multimedia, IEEE Transactions on, 13(6):1404—1406, 2011.
A. M. Webb, A. Kerne, R. Linder, N. Lupfer, Y. Qu, K. Keith, M. Car-
rasco, and Y. Chen. A free-form medium for curating the digital. In
Curating the Digital, pp. 73-87. Springer, 2016.

M. Woolf. Jupyter notebook + code for reproducing reddit subreddit
graphs. https: //github. com/minimaxir/reddit- graph, 2015.
