Purdue University

Purdue e-Pubs

Charleston Library Conference

Relevancy Redacted: Web-Scale Discovery and the “Filter Bubble”

Corey Davis
Royal Roads University, corey.4davis@royalroads.ca

Follow this and additional works at: https://docs. lib.purdue.edu/charleston

An indexed, print copy of the Proceedings is also available for purchase at:
http://www.thepress.purdue.edu/series/charleston.

You may also be interested in the new series, Charleston Insights in Library, Archival, and Information
Sciences. Find out more at: http://www.thepress. purdue.edu/series/charleston-insights-library-archival-

and-information-sciences.

Corey Davis, "Relevancy Redacted: Web-Scale Discovery and the “Filter Bubble” (2011). Proceedings of
the Charleston Library Conference.
http://dx.doi.org/10.5703/1288284314965

This document has been made available through Purdue e-Pubs, a service of the Purdue University Libraries. Please
contact epubs@purdue.edu for additional information.
Relevancy Redacted: Web-Scale Discovery and the “Filter Bubble”

Corey Davis, Technical Services Librarian, Royal Roads University Library

Abstract:

Web-scale discovery has arrived. With products like Summon and WorldCat Local, hundreds of millions of articles
and books are accessible at lightning speed from a single search box via the library. But there's a catch. As the size
of the index grows, so too does the challenge of relevancy. When Google launched in 1998 with an index of only 25
million pages, its patented PageRank algorithm was powerful enough to provide outstanding results. But the web
has grown to well over a trillion pages, and Google now employs over 200 different signals to determine what
search results you see. According to Eli Pariser, author of "The filter bubble: what the internet is hiding from you"
(Penguin, 2011), a growing number of these signals are based on what Google knows about you, especially your
web history; and, according to Pariser, serving up information that's "pleasant and familiar and confirms your be-
liefs" is becoming increasingly synonymous with relevancy. This session will critique Pariser's concept of the ‘filter
bubble’ in terms of collection development and the possible evolutions of discovery layers like Summon and
WorldCat Local, and the challenge of providing relevant academic research results in a web-scale world where stu-
dents increasingly expect the kind of personalization sometimes at odds with academia's adherence to privacy and

intellectual freedom.

The following is a critique of Eli Pariser’s The filter
bubble: What the Internet is hiding from you
(2011), and attempts to capture the conversational
nature of the presentation as given at the Charles-
ton Conference in 2011.

Not that long ago, when different people searched
Google, if they used the same search terms, they
got the exact same search results. Not anymore.
When you search Google (“Technology overview”,
n.d.), over 200 signals determine relevancy, includ-
ing location, and—if you’re logged into your Google
account, or you allow your browser to accept cook-
ies from Google—previous search history. Two
people can get two totally different results sets
based on the same key words, and increasingly,
these results are determined—at least in part—on
what you’ve searched for and clicked on before.
The rewards for this kind of personalization are bet-
ter relevancy, but the challenges are that we will
increasingly see results based on what we’ve looked
at before, creating a kind of ‘filter bubble’ that iso-

lates us from resources we might not otherwise see.

The concept of a filter bubble is fairly straightfor-
ward as presented by Eli Pariser in his TED talk Be-
ware online ‘filter bubbles’, which has received
around a million views on the TED talks website.

As web companies strive to tailor their services

{including news and search results) to our per-
sonal tastes, there's a dangerous unintended

556 Charleston Conference Proceedings 2011

consequence: We get trapped in a "filter bub-
ble" and don't get exposed to information that
could challenge or broaden our worldview.
(TED, 2011)

In 2009, Google started tailoring search results for all
users—whether signed into their Google Accounts or
not—based on their previous activities on the web. A
wide range of websites increasingly use similar algo-
rithms to guess what information a user wants based
on what they know about that user, such as their
location, previous click behavior, and search history.
This kind of personalization is fairly obvious at web-
sites like Amazon and Netflix, but it can be much
more subtle on sites like Google and Facebook. The
net result, however, is the same. Websites present
only the information which is, in a way, similar to
information previously consumed by a user. Accord-
ing to Pariser, people in the filter bubble are not as
exposed to contradictory perspectives and can, as a
result, become intellectually isolated in ways that
threaten their ability to meaningfully take part ina
society full of uncomfortable truths.

But what does this all have to do with Libraries and
their collections? | work at Royal Roads University
(RRU) in Victoria, British Columbia. We have about
2000 full-time equivalent (FTE) students but we’re
pursuing growth aggressively, particularly in the
realm of international undergraduate students,
and we expect our numbers to rise significantly in

Copyright of this contribution remains in the name of the author(s).
DOI: http://dx.doi.org/10.5703/1288284314965
the coming years. Right now we focus mostly on
graduate programs at the Master’s level, delivered
mostly online via Moodle. RRU was established by
the provincial government in 1995, and took up
quarters in an old military college. We have a rela-
tively small print collection, with the focus being
on our collection of ebooks and article databases.
So while we have more and more students spend-
ing time with us on campus, people mostly access
our collections online.

The Internet Archive’s Wayback Machine
http://www.archive.org/web/web.php is a wonder-
ful resource. | can use it to see what our library
website http://library.royalroads.ca looked like over
a decade ago. | can see that we linked to our local
catalog and an alphabetical list of article and re-
search databases, with a rudimentary attempt to
classify them by program or subject. By 2006 we
started organizing things a little differently and
placed a catalog search box on the homepage, but
we still were experiencing the basic problem of in-
formation silos, where that multiple databases con-
taining high-quality and highly sought-after content
dispersed across dozens and dozens of different
systems and platforms, with no way to effectively
search across them all. For books and video, a user
had to search the catalogue. For articles, they
needed to choose one of many article databases. To
help with this, we started creating subject guides.
We also did our part during information literacy
instruction to help make sense of this complex in-
formation environment.

We were suffering from three main issues, as iden-
tified by Burke (2010):

1. Noclear and compelling place to start re-
search.

2. No easy way to identify appropriate library
resources.

3. A lack of awareness of library resources.

Try using the Wayback Machine to look at Google’s
homepage in 1998, the year the company was
founded. There are no lists. The interface is easy
and intuitive to use. These are the same qualities
that draw us to Google today. While our library has
gone through three or four major website revamps
in an attempt to help our users navigate and use

our resources, Google’s main search site has re-
mained remarkably stable.

In 1998 Google co-founders Larry Page and Sergey
Brin published an article called The anatomy of a
large-scale hypertextual web search engine (Brin &
Page, 1998). At this time, ‘human curation’ was a
major way that companies like Yahoo! helped peo-
ple access information on the web, through the
creation of directories and other lists. Page and Brin
recognized that the web was growing too fast for
this kind of organization to continue in a sustainable
manor. Human editors simply couldn’t keep up. In
1999, according to Danny Sullivan (2008) at Search
Engine Land, a majority of major search engines
were still presenting human-powered results. But
these lists were expensive to create and they didn’t
scale to what the web was becoming. Lists and di-
rectories also didn’t deal well with obscure topics:
“Human maintained lists cover popular topics effec-
tively but are subjective, expensive to build and
maintain, slow to improve, and cannot cover all
esoteric topics” (Brin & Page, 1998, p. 107).
Google’s creators knew humans could not organize
the web effectively as it scaled, and that this organi-
zation had to be automated. One of the biggest
challenges they faced was the unstructured nature
of web documents, in contrast to the kind of data
libraries were dealing with, such as MARC records.
The web was a jumble of different shapes and sizes,
not a structured catalog of information based on
well-established metadata standards. “The web is a
vast collection of completely uncontrolled hetero-
geneous documents” (Brin & Page, 1998, p. 111).

At this point in the history of the web, Google’s
basic key to its rapid success was the PageRank al-
gorithm, which was powered by the nature of hy-
perlinks, rather that primarily by the occurrence of
keywords in a particular document.

PageRank relies on the uniquely democratic na-
ture of the web by using its vast link structure
as an indicator of an individual page’s value. In
essence, Google interprets a link from page A to
page B as a vote, by page A, for page B. But,
Google looks at considerably more than the
sheer volume of votes, or links a page receives;
for example, it also analyzes the page that casts
the vote. Votes cast by pages that are them-

End Users/Usage Statistics 557
selves “important” weigh more heavily and help
to make other pages “important.” Using these
and other factors, Google provides its views on
pages’ relative importance. (Sullivan, 2007)

Using the relationship between documents to drive
relevancy was the key to Google’s success. Relevan-
cy was about relationships. Editors couldn’t build
directories fast enough to meaningfully provide ac-
cess to the whole of the web.

We have built a large-scale search engine which
addresses many of the problems of existing sys-
tems. It makes especially heavy use of the addi-
tional structure present in hypertext to provide
much higher quality search results. (Brin &
Page, 1998, p. 108)

Although many of our individual systems at aca-
demic libraries have robust search capabilities, we
couldn’t until very recently bring these systems to-
gether in a meaningful and easy-to-use way. Search
has come a long way since 1998. Google now in-
dexes over a trillion pages, all accessible from a sin-
gle search box. User expectations are very different
now that they were in the late 1990s and early
2000s. When people search, they expect Google,
not Yahoo! circa 1998, which is how many academic
library websites are still organized. And because
many libraries still have websites that arguably ha-
ven’t in essence changed that much since the early
2000s, academic librarians rightly intuit that people
are not finding our content and services as easily as
they might:

In a 2009 survey of 66 academic libraries,
ProQuest found that 86 percent of libraries feel
that faculty and students do not understand the
breadth of their collections, and 94 percent
think the collections are not explored to their
fullest. (Burke, 2010).

Now, we actually have the tools to take us there. At
RRU, we are using the web-scale discovery service
called Summon from Serials Solutions. According to
Serials Solutions:

Through one simple search to a single unified

index, the Summon service provides instant ac-
cess to the breadth of authoritative content

558 Charleston Conference Proceedings 2011

that's the hallmark of great libraries. No need
to broadcast searches to other databases —it
provides one search box for a researcher to en-
ter any terms they want and quickly get credi-
ble results in one relevancy ranked-list.
(ProQuest, 2011)

This is not federated or broadcast searching, where
queries are sent live to disparate systems and tech-
nology such as screen scraping is used to collocate
results. This is different. Summon is a pre-built index,
just like Google. It searches ebooks, books, videos,
theses, articles, and more, and in most cases, it
searches the full-text. It is lightning-quick and really
big, with a current index of over 500 million items.

And it’s that “really big” that brings us back to the
filter bubble. Pariser starts his book out mentioning
a post on the official Google blog from the 4th of
December, 2009:

Today we're helping people get better search
results by extending Personalized Search to
signed-out users worldwide, and in more than
forty languages. Now when you search using
Google, we will be able to better provide you
with the most relevant results possible. For ex-
ample, since | always search for [recipes] and
often click on results from epicurious.com,
Google might rank epicurious.com higher on
the results page the next time | look for recipes.
Other times, when I'm looking for news about
Cornell University's sports teams, | search for
[big red]. Because | frequently click on
www.cornellbigred.com, Google might show
me this result first, instead of the Big Red soda
company or others. (Horling & Kulick, 2009)

Google states that: “By personalizing your results,
we hope to deliver you the most useful, relevant
information on the Internet.” (Horling & Kulick,
2009) Everybody understands that search engines
are a big deal. They've changed the way we think
about information. They bring the world to us. But
this change was big, even in terms of Google. Danny
Sullivan (2009) of Search Engine Land called it “...the
biggest change that has ever happened in search
engines...” According to Sullivan (2009), “until now,
search engines have largely delivered the same re-
sults to everyone. Two different people could
search for Barack Obama and get back the same set
of results.”

The days of “normal” search results that every-
one sees are now over. Personalized results are
the “new normal,” and the change is going to
shift the search world and society in general in
unpredictable ways. (Sullivan, 2009)

This post very well could have formed the genesis
for the filter bubble idea. According to Pariser
(2011): “with little notice or fanfare, the digital
world is fundamentally changing.” (p. 6). Once an
anonymous medium where anyone could be any-
one, the web has become a tool for soliciting and
analyzing our personal data. For example, diction-
ary.com, according to Pariser, places over 200 track-
ing cookies and beacons on your computer when
you first visit the site. Search for the word “depres-
sion” on this website, and you could see ads for
anti-depressants on another. “The race to know as
much as possible about you has become the central
battle of the era for Internet giants like Google, Fa-
cebook, Apple, and Microsoft.” (Pariser, p. 6) The
more personally relevant their information offerings
are, the more ads they can sell, and the more likely
you are to buy the products they are offering. And it
works! Amazon was a pioneer of personalization.
The company recorded revenues of $24.5 billion
during 2009, an increase of 27.9% over 2008.
(Datamonitor, “Amazon, Inc.”, 2011). It makes bil-
lions by, in great part, predicting what you’re going
to buy. And for Google, the more relevant the re-
sults, the better they can target ads, the more
money they make.

Advertising is, to understate it, a big deal for
Google. Google made almost $30 billion in 2010, up
24% from 2009 (Datamonitor, “Google, Inc.”, 2011).
96% of that revenue comes from ads. According to
Pariser, if personalization was all about advertising,
that wouldn’t be so bad, but it’s effecting how in-
formation flows on the web. If you get your news
from Facebook (and, according to Pariser, 36% of
Americans under 30 get their news from social net-
working sites), you may only see the things that
your friends like. This is Pariser’s central critique.

..these engines create a unique universe of in-
formation for each of us—what | call the filter

bubble—which fundamentally alters the way we
encounter ideas and information. (Pariser, p. 9)

But why do we personalize? Too much information
leads to what blogger Steve Rubel (2007) calls “at-
tention crash”. Personalization helps search provid-
ers filter through truly massive amounts of infor-
mation need to get to what the user wants. If
search results are not personalized, it’s much more
difficult for a search engine to determine what a
particular user wants. And the signals users send
are pretty pathetic. “A number of studies have
shown that a vast majority of queries to search en-
gines are short and under-specified and users may
have completely different intentions for the same
query.” (Qiu & Cho, 2006, p. 1) According to Jansen,
Spink, and Saracevic (2000), who analyzed over one
million Web queries by users of the Excite search
engine: “we found that most people use few search
terms, few modified queries, view few Web pages,
and rarely use advanced search features.” (p. 233)
The mean number of words per query was 2.21.
31% of all queries used only a single word. Most
users searched for only one query and did not fol-
low with successive searches. Silverstein, Marais,
Henzinger, and Moricz (1999) analyzed an AltaVista
Search Engine query log consisting of approximately
1 billion entries for search requests over a period of
six weeks. This represents almost 285 million user
sessions. They found that the average number of
terms in a query was 2.35. For 85% of the queries
only the first result screen is viewed. 77% of the
sessions contain only one query. Another project
(Wang, Berry, & Yang, 2003) analyzed 541,920 user
queries submitted to and executed in an academic
website during a four-year period, and found that
38% of all queries contained only one term, with a
mean query length of two words. And analysis of
Elsevier’s ScienceDirect platform (Ke, Kwakkelaar,
Tai, & Chen, 2002) revealed that “approximately
85.2% of queries contained one, two, or three
terms, although the average query length was 2.27
terms.” (p. 275)

Personalization can make search more relevant
when queries are generally short and ambiguous.
According to Qiu and Cho (2006), “...a user's general
preference may help the search engine disambigu-
ate the true intention of a query.” (p. 727) Matthijs
and Radlinski (2011) examined personalizing web

End Users/Usage Statistics 559
search using long term browsing history and found
that “... personalization techniques significantly
outperform both default Google ranking and the
best previous personalization methods.” (p. 34) So,
when Google personalizes, they are interested in
increasing the relevance of search results, and this
is based on sound evidence. Personalization truly
does increase relevancy.

When you search using Google, you get more
relevant, useful search results, recommenda-
tions, and other personalized features. By per-
sonalizing your results, we hope to deliver you
the most useful, relevant information on the In-
ternet. (Google, 2011)

Google looks primarily at search history. If you’re
signed in to a Google account, Web History is used,
and if you are signed out, Google’s servers link to an
anonymous browser cookie that tracks your click
history for up to 180 days (Google, 2011).

This is a big problem for Pariser: “what you’ve
clicked on in the past determines what you see
next.” (Pariser, p. 16) This can lead to something he
calls informational determinism: “in the filter bub-
ble, there’s less room for the chance encounters
that bring insight and learning.” (p. 11) Pariser
spends a good deal of time on the importance of
serendipity. He argues quite convincingly that crea-
tivity and new ideas and the solutions to our most
intractable problems come from chance encounters
with new or challenging people and ideas. The filter
bubble threatens this. It’s something that librarians
and many scholars recognize the importance of too.
There is a certain irony here. Before PageRank,
search results could be humorously irrelevant, and
the balance between locating relevant resources
and discovery through serendipity was skewed to
the side of chance encounters. Google has worked
hard since 1998 to lessen these kinds of chance en-
counters, as mentioned in Brin and Page’s 1998 pa-
per: “While the results are often amusing and ex-
pand users‘ horizons, they are often frustrating and
consume precious time.” (Brin & Page, 1998, p. 116)

The need for more relevant results in order to in-
crease advertising revenue in great part drove

Google’s move to personalization. Danny Sullivan
from Search Engine Land, when writing about this

560 Charleston Conference Proceedings 2011

move, used a Library metaphor to describe how it
could work, and hinted at how informational per-
sonalization was done at libraries in a time before
Google and other search engines:

Imagine you’re in a library—the classic meta-
phor for a search engine and how it interacts
with a searcher, from when WebCrawler’s Brian
Pinkerton used to explain how they worked
back in the 1990s. Someone walks in and says
“travel.” In a library, the librarian would ask
more questions, to try and understand what
they want. Early search engines didn’t do this.
They couldn’t do this!

Over time, search engines tried to do the li-
brary-style conversation by offering related
searches, as a way to get searchers to refine
their queries. Then Google took a huge leap last
year by making use of your previous query to
refine your results. That makes sense and
doesn’t seem to require any particular reason
to ask for user opt-in. Again, imagine the librar-
ian. It would be unreasonable to expect them
to forget the last thing you said in a conversa-
tion you were having, as they tried to help you.
Unreasonable and unhelpful.

But would you expect the librarian to help you

by remembering everything you’d asked over a
half-year period? That might be helpful, sure, but
it might also be eerie. But this is what Google is
doing now. It remembers everything you’ve
searched for over 180 days, and it uses that in-
formation to customize your results. To alert you
about this huge change, it made a blog post on
Friday afternoon. That’s it. (Sullivan, 2009)

So, in some ways, Sullivan is making a connection
here. Google is attempting to automate what librari-
ans have always done, which is to use human judg-
ment and experience to mediate access to scholarly
works and other kinds of information. According to
Jane Burke (2010), Vice-president of ProQuest:

Increasingly, libraries are viewed as irrelevant to
the research process, leaving them vulnerable to
being cut, both financially and from the mind of

the end user. However, new ways of discovering
content in library collections holds the promise
of returning the researcher to the library.

For this reason, tools like Summon hold great prom-
ise: “web scale discovery efforts aim squarely at
Google as the competitor and mimic that search
engine’s characteristics of simple, easy, fast.”
(Burke, 2010)

It has taken a while to settle in with Summon, but
for the most part, our users at RRU are happy with
this new and important tool. Initially, relevance was
a bigger problem than it is now.

Could Summon search results be personalized using
cookie technology similar to that employed by
Google to track users’ past click history? Should we
employ this kind of technology? In a 2002 thought-
peice, Surprenant and Perry wrote:

Being able to see the student allows the Cybrar-
ian, with the aid of a diagnostic algorithm which
has access to their infoprofiles, to help gauge
how comfortable/secure the student is with the
current skill set and to gain some insight into
the level of his/her developing abili-
ties/capabilities.

Does the future really hold a spot for a human be-
ing—a librarian—to access an ‘infoprofile’ of a par-
ticular individual in order to help them find the best
information available? Does this kind of mediation
of experience have a place in a world where com-
plex personalization algorithms could hypothetically
determine relevant without our help? What is the
benefit to our users in having to interact with us,
rather than an online search tool?

Surprenant and Perry (2002) also envision a high-
level of personalization in the future: “Communi-
cating through Virtual Reality helmets and V-mail,
and utilizing diagnostic tools to customize resources
to individual profiles, cybrarians will provide effective
support for problem solving and discovery groups.”

These are important concepts to ponder. They
strike at the tension within academic libraries that
disintermediation represents, where systems be-
come usable enough—even in the face of increasing

complexity—that reference and instruction are
seen as less and less important.

Pariser ends his book with a call to ‘algorithmic lit-
eracy’, which means understanding the basic oper-
ating principles of the systems you rely on for in-
formation. Librarians can and should play a greater
role in explaining not only the information land-
scape for scholarly and other resources relevant to
students and faculty, but how the systems most
commonly used to gather information actually
work, both in terms of benefits and risks.

References

Brin, S., & Page, L. (1998). The anatomy of a large-
scale hypertextual web search engine.
Computer Networks and ISDN Systems,
30(1-7), 107-117.

Burke, J. (2010). Discovery versus disintermediation:
The new reality driven by today’s end-user.
Paper presented at the VALA2010: Connec-
tions, Content, Conversations, 15th Biennial
Conference and Exhibition, Melbourne, 9-
11. Retrieved from
http://www.vala.org.au/vala2010/papers2
010/VALA2010 57 Burke Final.paf.

Datamonitor. (2011). Amazon, inc. Datamonitor
Report. Retrieved from
http://search.ebscohost.com.ezproxy.royal
roads.ca/login.aspx?direct=true&db=dmhc
o&AN=2B52E1D8-E964-4D7F-8B1B-
C48DBC97815F&site=bsi-live

Datamonitor. (2011). Google, Inc. Datamonitor Re-
port. Retrieved from
http://search.ebscohost.com/login.aspx?di
rect=true&db=dmhco&AN=5B199F61-
608D-4923-B4A3-FS5EE15285ADE&site=bsi-
live

Google. (n.d.). Technology overview. Retrieved from
http://www.google.com/about/corporate/
company/tech.html.

Google. (2011). Personalized search basics. Re-
trieved from
http://support.google.com/accounts/bin/a
nswer.pyPhl=en&answer=54041,

Hoeber, O., & Massie, C. (2010). Automatic topic
learning for personalized re-ordering of
web search results. Advances in Intelligent
Web Mastering-2, 105-116. Retrieved from

End Users/Usage Statistics 561
http://www.cs.mun.ca/~hoeber/download
{2009 awic_misearch.pdf.

Horling, B., & Kulick, M. (2009). Personalized search
for everyone. Retrieved from
http://googleblog.blogspot.com/2009/12/p
ersonalized-search-for-everyone.html

Jansen, B. J., Spink, A., & Saracevic, T. (2000).
Searching the web: The public and their
queries. Journal of the American Society for
Information Science and Technology 52(3),
226-234.

Ke, H., Kwakkelaar, R., Tai, Y., & Chen, L. (2002).
Exploring behavior of e-journal users in sci-
ence and technology: Transaction log anal-
ysis of Elsevier's ScienceDirect OnSite in
Taiwan. Library & Information Science Re-
search, 24(3), 265-291.

Matthijs, N., & Radlinski, F. (2011). Personalizing
web search using long term browsing histo-
ry. Paper presented at the Proceedings of
the Fourth ACM International Conference
on Web Search and Data Mining, 25-34. Re-
trieved from
http://research.microsoft.com/pubs/13993
3/MatthijsRadlinski_WSDM2011.pdf.

Pariser, E. (2011). Filter bubble : What the internet is
hiding from you. New York: Penguin Press.

ProQuest. (2011). The Summon™ Service. Retrieved
from
http://www.serialssolutions.com/discovery
/summon/

Qiu, F., & Cho, J. (2006). Automatic identification of
user interest for personalized search. Paper
presented at the Proceedings of the 15th
International Conference on World Wide
Web, 727-736. Retrieved from
http://oak.cs.ucla.edu/~cho/papers/qiu-

ui.pdf.

562 Charleston Conference Proceedings 2011

Rubel, S. (2007). The attention crash: A new kind of
Dot-Com bust. Retreived from
http://adage.com/article/steve-

rubel/attention-crash-a-kind-dot-
bust/117325/.

Silverstein, C., Marais, H., Henzinger, M., & Moricz,
M. (1999). Analysis of a very large web
search engine query log. Paper presented
at the ACM SIGIR Forum, 33(1) 6-12.

Sullivan, D. (2008). Search 4.0: Social search engines
& putting humans back in search. Retrieved
from http://searchengineland.com/search-
40-putting-humans-back-in-search-14086

Sullivan, D. (2007).What is Google PageRank? A
guide for searchers & webmasters. Re-
trieved from
http://searchengineland.com/what-is-
google-pagerank-a-guide-for-searchers-
webmasters-11068.

Sullivan, D. (2009). Google’s personalized results:
The “new normal” that deserves extraordi-
nary attention. Retrieved from
http://searchengineland.com/googles-
personalized-results-the-new-normal-
31290.

Surprenant, T. T., & Perry, C. A. (2002). The Aca-
demic Cybrarian in 2012: A Futuristic Essay.
Retrieved from
http://www.docstoc.com/docs/15482044/
Full-Text---Alphafduedu.

TED. (2011). Eli Pariser: Beware online "filter bub-
bles". Retrieved from
http://www.ted.com/talks/eli_pariser_bew
are_online filter _bubbles.html.

Wang, P., Berry, M. W., & Yang, Y. (2003). Mining
longitudinal web queries: Trends and pat-
terns. Journal of the American Society for
Information Science and Technology, 54{8),
743-758.

 

 

 

 

 

 
