[PDF] The Filter Bubble: What The
Internet Is Hiding From You

Eli Pariser - pdf download free book

The Filter Bubble

pled __ ad Books Details:
ES (ternct Title: The Filter Bubble: What the I
ll Author: Eli Pariser

|: Released: 2011-05-12
es Language

EE icing Pages: 304

(hill ISBN: 159d20 5008

El oon ISENL3: 9F8-L59d203008
Po ASIN: 1594205008
es vo.

Eli Pariser

CLICK HERE FOR DOWNLOAD

pdf, mobi, epub, azw, kindle

Description:

Author Q&A with Eli Pariser
Q: What is a “Filter Bubble”?

A: We're used to thinking of the Internet like an enormous library, with services like
Google providing a universal map. But that’s no longer really the case. Sites from
Google and Facebook to Yahoo News and the New York Times are now increasingly
personalized - based on your web history, they filter information to show you the stuff
they think you want to see. That can be very different from what everyone else sees -
or from what we need to see.
Your filter bubble is this unique, personal universe of information created just for you
by this array of personalizing filters. It’s invisible and it’s becoming more and more
difficult to escape.

Q: | like the idea that websites might show me information relevant to my interests—it
can be overwhelming how much information is available | already only watch TV
shows and listen to radio programs that are known to have my same political leaning.
What’s so bad about this?

A: It’s true: We've always selected information sources that accord with our own
views. But one of the creepy things about the filter bubble is that we’re not really
doing the selecting. When you turn on Fox News or MSNBC, you have a sense of what
their editorial sensibility is: Fox isn’t going to show many stories that portray Obama in
a good light, and MSNBC isn’t going to the ones that portray him badly. Personalized
filters are a different story: You don’t know who they think you are or on what basis
they’re showing you what they’re showing. And as a result, you don’t really have any
sense of what’s getting edited out - or, in fact, that things are being edited out at all.

Q: How does money fit into this picture?

A: The rush to build the filter bubble is absolutely driven by commercial interests. It’s
becoming clearer and clearer that if you want to have lots of people use your website,
you need to provide them with personally relevant information, and if you want to
make the most money on ads, you need to provide them with relevant ads. This has
triggered a personal information gold rush, in which the major companies - Google,
Facebook, Microsoft, Yahoo, and the like - are competing to create the most
comprehensive portrait of each of us to drive personalized products. There’s also a
whole “behavior market” opening up in which every action you take online - every
mouse click, every form entry - can be sold as a commodity.

Q: What is the Internet hiding from me?

A: As Google engineer Jonathan McPhie explained to me, it’s different for every person
- and in fact, even Google doesn’t totally know how it plays out on an individual level.
At an aggregate level, they can see that people are clicking more. But they can’t
predict how each individual’s information environment is altered.

In general, the things that are most likely to get edited out are the things you're least
likely to click on. Sometimes, this can be a real service - if you never read articles
about sports, why should a newspaper put a football story on your front page? But
apply the same logic to, say, stories about foreign policy, and a problem starts to
emerge. Some things, like homelessness or genocide, aren’t highly clickable but are
highly important.

Q: Which companies or Websites are personalizing like this?

A: In one form or another, nearly every major website on the Internet is flirting with
personalization. But the one that surprises people most is Google. If you and | Google
the same thing at the same time, we may get very different results. Google tracks
hundreds of “signals” about each of us - what kind of computer we’re on, what we've
searched for in the past, even how long it takes us to decide what to click on - and
uses it to customize our results. When the result is that our favorite pizza parlor shows
up first when we Google pizza, it’s useful. But when the result is that we only see the
information that is aligned with our religious or social or political beliefs, it’s difficult to
maintain perspective.
Q: Are any sites being transparent about their personalization?

A: Some sites do better than others. Amazon, for example, is often quite transparent
about the personalization it does: “We’re showing you Brave New World because you
bought 1984.” But it’s one thing to personalize products and another to personalize
whole information flows, like Google and Facebook are doing. And very few users of
those services are even marginally aware that this kind of filtering is at work.

Q: Does this issue of personalization impact my privacy or jeopardize my identity at
all?

A: Research psychologists have known for a while that the media you consume shapes
your identity. So when the media you consume is also shaped by your identity, you
can slip into a weird feedback loop. A lot of people see a simple version of this on
Facebook: You idly click on an old classmate, Facebook reads that as a friendship, and
pretty soon you're seeing every one of John or Sue’s posts.

Gone awry, personalization can create compulsive media - media targeted to appeal
to your personal psychological weak spots. You can find yourself eating the equivalent
of information junk food instead of having a more balanced information diet.

Q: You make it clear that while most Websites’ user agreements say they won’t share
our personal information, they also maintain the right to change the rules at any time.
Do you foresee sites changing those rules to profit from our online personas?

A: They already have. Facebook, for example, is notorious for its bait-and-switch
tactics when it comes to privacy. For a long time, what you “Liked” on Facebook was
private, and the site promised to keep it that way. Then, overnight, they made that
information public to the world, in order to make it easier for their advertisers to target
specific subgroups.

There’s an irony in the fact that while Rolex needs to get Tom Cruise’s permission to
put his face on a billboard, it doesn’t need to get my permission to advertise my
endorsement to my friends on Facebook. We need laws that give people more rights in
their personal data.

Q: Is there any way to avoid this personalization? What if I'm not logged into a site?

A: Even if you’re not logged into Google, for example, an engineer told me there are
57 signals that the site uses to figure out who you are: whether you're on a Mac or PC
or iPad, where you’re located when you're Googling, etc. And in the near future, it’ll be
possible to “fingerprint” unique devices, so that sites can tell which individual
computer you're using. That’s why erasing your browser cookies is at best a partial
solution—it only partially limits the information available to personalizers.

What we really need is for the companies that power the filter bubble to take
responsibility for the immense power they now have - the power to determine what
we see and don’t see, what we know and don’t know. We need them to make sure we
continue to have access to public discourse and a view of the common good. A world
based solely on things we “Like” is a very incomplete world.

I’m optimistic that they can. It’s worth remembering that newspapers weren't always
informed by a sense of journalistic ethics. They existed for centuries without it. It was
only when critics like Walter Lippman began to point out how important they were that
the newspapers began to change. And while journalistic ethics aren't perfect, because
of them we have been better informed over the last century. We need algorithmic
ethics to guide us through the next.

Q: What are the business leaders at Google and Facebook and Yahoo saying about
their responsibilities?

A: To be honest, they’re frustratingly coy. They tend to frame the trend in the passive
tense: Google’s Eric Schmidt recently said “It will be very hard for people to watch or
consume something that has not in some sense been tailored for them,” rather than
“Google is making it very hard...” Mark Zuckerberg perfectly summed up the tension
in personalization when he said “A squirrel dying in your front yard may be more
relevant to your interests right now than people dying in Africa.” But he refuses to
engage with what that means at a societal level - especially for the people in Africa.

Q: Your background is as a political organizer for the liberal Website MoveOn.org. How
does that experience inform your book?

A: I've always believed the Internet could connect us all together and help create a
better, more democratic world. That’s what excited me about MoveOn - here we were,
connecting people directly with each other and with political leaders to create change.

But that more democratic society has yet to emerge, and | think it’s partly because
while the Internet is very good at helping groups of people with like interests band

together (like MoveOn), it’s not so hot at introducing people to different people and
ideas. Democracy requires discourse and personalization is making that more and

more elusive.

And that worries me, because we really need the Internet to live up to that connective
promise. We need it to help us solve global problems like climate change, terrorism, or
natural resource management which by their nature require massive coordination, and
great wisdom and ingenuity. These problems can’t be solved by a person or two - they
require whole societies to participate. And that just won’t happen if we’re all isolated
in a web of one.

Review "A powerful indictment of the current system." ---The Wall Street Journal
--This text refers to the edition.

Title: The Filter Bubble: What the Internet Is Hiding from You
Author: Eli Pariser

Released: 2011-05-12

Language:

Pages: 304

ISBN: 1594203008

ISBN13: 978-1594203008

ASIN: 1594203008
