1308.6149v1 [cs.SI] 28 Aug 2013

arXiv

The Extreme Right Filter Bubble

Derek O’Callaghan
University College Dublin
Dublin 4, Ireland .
derek.ocallaghan@ucd.ie

Joe Carthy
University College Dublin
_ Dublin 4, Ireland |
joe.carthy@ucd.ie

ABSTRACT

Due to its status as the most popular video sharing platform,
YouTube plays an important role in the online strategy of
extreme right groups, where it is often used to host associ-
ated content such as music and other propaganda. In this
paper, we develop a categorization suitable for the analysis
of extreme right channels found on YouTube. By combining
this with an NMF-based topic modelling method, we catego-
rize channels originating from links propagated by extreme
right Twitter accounts. This method is also used to cate-
gorize related channels, which are determined using results
returned by YouTube’s related video service. We identify
the existence of a “filter bubble”, whereby users who access
an extreme right YouTube video are highly likely to be rec-
ommended further extreme right content.

Keywords

extreme right; YouTube; filter bubble; matrix factorization.

Categories and Subject Descriptors
H.3.3 [Information Search and Retrieval]: Clustering;
H.3.5 [Online Information Services]: Web-based services

1. INTRODUCTION

Social media platforms have become a key component in the
online strategy of extremist political groups, as they provide
direct access to audiences, particularly youth, for radicaliza-
tion and recruitment purposes [1, 12]. YouTube’s status as
the most popular video sharing platform means that it is es-
pecially useful to these groups. Extreme right content such
as music and other associated propaganda, some of which
is deemed illegal in certain countries, is made freely avail-
able there, often for long periods of time [4]. In addition to
hosting user-generated video content, YouTube also provides

Derek Greene
University College Dublin

Dublin 4, Ireland
derek.greene@ucd.ie

Maura Conway
Dublin City University
Dublin 9, Ireland
maura.conway@dcu.ie

Padraig Cunningham
University College Dublin
Dublin 4, Ireland ;
pacraig.cunningham@ucd.ie

recommendation services, where sets of related and recom-
mended videos are presented to users, based on factors such
as co-visitation count and prior viewing history [13].

In 2011, Pariser proposed the filter bubble concept, which
stated that recommendation services may limit the types of
content to which a user is exposed [27]. Recommendation in
social media can therefore have the undesirable consequence
of a user being excluded from information that is not aligned
with their existing perspective, potentially leading to im-
mersion within an ideological bubble. In this paper we show
that this can happen when a user accesses an extreme right
(ER) video or channel on YouTube. In studies on English
and German ER. content, we show that users are likely to be
recommended further ER content within the same category,
or related ER content from a different category. They are
unlikely to be presented with non-ER content (Figure 7).

Our previous work found that Twitter is used by extreme
right groups to propagate links to content hosted on third-
party sites, including YouTube [26]. These links enabled
us to retrieve video and uploader channel information from
YouTube, where subsequent analysis is focused upon chan-
nels (synonymous with uploaders or accounts [29]), rather
than individual videos. We use a topic modelling strategy
to characterize these channels (see Section 4), where content
linked to these channels is then characterized in the same
fashion. Our proposed scheme includes categories identified
in the academic literature on the extreme right, which are
suited to the videos and channels found on YouTube. We
find evidence that an extreme right filter bubble does indeed
exist, as shown by the results discussed in Section 5.

In Section 2, we provide a description of prior work on You-
Tube categorization and recommendation, along with re-
search that involved the categorization of online extreme
right content. The retrieval of YouTube data based on links
originating from extreme right Twitter accounts is then dis-
cussed in Section 3. Next, in Section 4, we describe the
methodology used for related channel ranking, topic iden-
tification, and channel categorization. Our investigation
into the extreme right filter bubble can be found in Sec-
tion 5, where we focus on two data sets consisting primarily
of English and German language channels respectively. An
overview of the entire process can be found in Figure 1.
2. RELATED WORK

2.1 Video Recommendation

Video recommendation on YouTube has been the focus of a
number of studies. For example, Baluja et al. suggested that
standard approaches used in text domains were not easily
applicable due to the difficulty of reliable video labelling
[2]. They proposed a graph-based approach that utilised
the viewing patterns of YouTube users, which did not rely
on the analysis of the underlying videos. The recommen-
dation system in use at YouTube at the time was discussed
by Davidson et al., where sets of personalized videos were
generated with a combination of prior user activity (videos
watched, favorited, liked) and the traversal of a co-visitation
graph [13]. In this process, recommendation diversity was
obtained by means of a limited transitive closure over the
generated related video graph. Zhou et al. performed a mea-
surement study on YouTube videos to determine the sources
responsible for video views, and found that related video
recommendation was the main source outside of the search
function for the majority of videos [33]. They also found
that the click through rate to related videos was high, where
the position of a video in a related video list played a critical
role. A similar finding was made by Figueiredo et al. , where
they demonstrated the importance of key mechanisms such
as related videos in the attraction of users to videos [14].

Turning to the task of YouTube video categorization, Filip-
pova et al. presented a text-based method that relied upon
metadata such as video title, description, tags and com-
ments, in conjunction with a pre-defined set of 75 categories
[15]. Using a bag-of-words model, they found that all of the
text sources contributed to successful category prediction.
More recently, a framework for the categorization of video
channels was proposed by Simonet, involving the use of se-
mantic entities identified within the corresponding video and
channel profile text metadata, [29]. Following the judgement
that existing taxonomies were not well-suited to this partic-
ular problem, a new category taxonomy was developed for
YouTube content. Roy et al. investigated both video recom-
mendation and categorization in tandem, where videos were
categorized according to topics built from Twitter activity,
leading to the enrichment of related video recommendation
[28]. Video text metadata was used for this process, and the
topics were based on the categories proposed by Filippova
et al. , in addition to the standard YouTube categories at the
time. Separately, they also analyzed diversity among related
videos, where they found that there was a 25% probability
on average of a related video being from a different category.

2.2 Extreme Right Categorization

In the various studies that have analyzed online extreme
right activity, certain differences can be observed among re-
searchers in relation to their categorization of this activity
and associated organizations [5]. Burris et al. proposed a
set of eight primarily US-centric categories in their analy-
sis of a white supremacist website network; Holocaust Re-
visionists, Christian Identity Theology, Neo-Nazis, White
Supremacists, Foreign (non-US) Nationalists, Racist Skin-
heads, Music, Books/Merchandise [9]. A similar schema
was used by Gerstenfeld et al., which also included Ku Klux
Klan and Militia categories [16]. They also discussed the dif-
ficulty involved in the categorization of certain sub-groups,
where a general category (Other) was applied in such cases.

These categories were adapted in separate studies of Italian
and German extreme right groups, where new additions in-
cluded Political Parties and Conspiracy Theorists, while oth-
ers such as Music and Skinheads were merged into a Young
category (Tateo [32], Caiani et al. [10]). Rather than focus-
ing on ideological factors, Goodwin proposed four organiza-
tional types found within the European extreme right milieu;
political parties, grassroots social movements, independent
smaller groups, and individual ‘lone wolves’. Other notable
categories include the Autonomous Nationalists identified
within Germany in recent years. These groups focus specif
ically on attracting a younger audience, where social media
is often a critical component in this process [1].

The popularity of YouTube has led to its usage by extreme
right groups for the purpose of content dissemination. Its
related video recommendation service provides a motivation
for the current work to analyze the extent to which a viewer
may be exposed to such content. Separately, disagreements
over the categorization of online extreme right activity sug-
gests that a specific set of categories may be required for the
analysis of this domain.

3. DATA

In our previous work, we investigated the potential for Twit-
ter to act as one possible gateway to communities within
the wider online network of the extreme right [26]. Two
data sets associated with extreme right English language
and German language Twitter accounts were generated, by
retrieving profile data over an extended period of time. We
gathered all tweeted links to external websites, and used
these to construct an extended network representation. In
the current work, we are solely interested in tweeted You-
Tube URIs. Data for the Twitter accounts were retrieved
between June 2012 and May 2013, as limited by the Twit-
ter API restrictions effective at the time. YouTube URIs
found in tweets were analyzed to determine a set of chan-
nel (account) identifiers that were directly (channel profile
page URD or indirectly (URI of video uploaded by channel)
tweeted. All identified channels were included, regardless of
the number of tweets in which they featured. Throughout
this work, we refer to these as seed channels; 26,460 and
3,046 were identified for the English and German data sets
respectively.

In order to explore the filter bubble hypothesis we must
first categorize YouTube channels. To do this, we use text
metadata associated with the videos uploaded by a particu-
lar channel, namely their titles, descriptions and associated
keywords. Although user comments have been employed
in other work [15], they were excluded here. This decision
followed an initial manual analysis of a sample of tweeted
videos, which found that comments were often not present,
or had been explicitly disabled by the uploader. We also
excluded the YouTube “category” field as it was considered
too broad to be useful in the extreme right domain. Using
the YouTube API, we initially retrieved the available text
metadata for up to 1,000 of the videos uploaded by each seed
channel, where the API returns videos in reverse chronologi-
cal order according to their upload time. In cases where seed
channels and their videos were no longer available (e.g. the
channel had been suspended or deleted since appearing in a
tweet), these channels were simply ignored.
(a) Data

 

Related Channel

(b) Methodology

(c) Experiments

 

 

Ranking

 

 

YouTube
Data Retrieval

>
>

Filter Bubble
Investigation

 

 

 

 

 

Topic Identification

 

 

 

Channel
Categorization

 

 

 

 

 

pty
I
|
|

Figure 1: Overview of the process used to investigate the extreme right filter bubble on YouTube.

In order to address the variance in the number of uploaded
videos per channel, and to reduce the volume of subsequent
data retrieval, we randomly sampled up to 50 videos for each
seed. For each video in this sample, metadata values were
retrieved for the top ten related videos returned by the API.
Using the default parameter settings, these videos appear to
be returned in order of “relevance”, as defined internally by
YouTube, similar to the default behaviour of video search re-
sults feeds described in the API documentation (June 2013).
We refer to the corresponding uploaders as related channels;
1,451,189 and 195,146 were identified for the English and
German data sets respectively. As before, we then retrieved
the available text metadata for up to 1,000 videos uploaded
by each unseen related channel, from which a random sam-
ple of up to 50 videos was generated.

For both seed and related channels, the corresponding up-
loaded video sample is used for categorization; this is de-
scribed in Section 4.2. Separately, we also note that the
videos in question may have been uploaded at any time prior
to retrieval, where these times are not necessarily restricted
to the period of either Twitter or YouTube data retrieval.

4. METHODOLOGY

Having retrieved the channel and video data from YouTube,
the next steps involved ranking the related channels for each
seed channel, identifying latent topics associated with the
uploaded videos, and using these to categorize both seed
and related channels. This section corresponds to part (b)
of the process overview diagram found in Figure 1.

4.1 Related Channel Ranking

For our analysis, it was first necessary to generate a set of
related channel rankings for each seed channel, according
to the related rankings returned by the YouTube API for
the sample of videos uploaded by the seed. We applied the
SVD rank aggregation method proposed by Greene et al. to
combine the rankings for each uploaded video into a single
ranked set across all videos for the seed in question, from
which we select the top ranked related channels [19]. We
restrict our focus to the top 10, given the impact of related
video position on click through rate [33]. The aggregation
process for each seed channel s; and its n; uploaded videos
is as follows:

1. For each uploaded video vw; (7 € [1,ni]), generate
a rank vector rvi; between the seed s; and its re-

lated channels using the retrieved YouTube API re-
lated video ranking. For channels related to seed videos
other than w%;, a rank of (m;+ 1) is applied, where m;
is the total number of channels related to s;.

2. Stack all rv; rank vectors as columns, to form the m; x
m rank matrix R;, and normalise the columns of this
matrix to unit length.

3. Compute the SVD of Ri, and extract the first left sin-
gular vector. Arrange the entries in this vector in de-
scending order to produce a ranking of all channels
related to this seed.

From the ranking generated above, we then select the top 10
ranked related channels for each seed. These channels are
used for our filter bubble investigation in Section 5.

4.2 Topic Identification

For the purpose of channel categorization, we initially iden-
tified latent topics associated with the channels in both data
sets, based on their uploaded videos. Following the ap-
proach of Hannon et al. [20], we generated a “profile doc-
ument” for each seed and related channel, consisting of an
aggregation of the text metadata from their corresponding
uploaded video sample, from which a tokenized representa-
tion was produced. All available terms in the channel doc-
uments were used, where the tokenization process involved
the exclusion of URIs and normalization of diacritics. We
excluded a custom set of stopwords, such as official YouTube
category terms, additional YouTube-specific terms such as
“video” and “view”, and terms from multiple language stop-
word lists. Due to the frequent presence of names in the
data, we also excluded all identified first names. As sug-
gested by Fillipova et al. [15], terms were not stemmed due
to the expectation of both noisy terms and those of multiple
languages. Low-frequency terms appearing in < 20 channel
documents were excluded at this point.

These channel documents were transformed to log-based
TF-IDF vectors, and subsequently normalized to unit length.
However, in an attempt to reduce the term dimensionality
found in the combination of seed and related channel docu-
ments, we generated the TF-IDF vectors in two stages. The
first stage constructed vectors for the seed documents, from
which a reduced seed term vocabulary was derived. In the
second stage, vectors for the related documents were then
Table 1: Categories of extreme right YouTube content, based on common categorizations found in academic literature on
extreme right ideology.

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

Category Description Source
Anti-Islam Can include political parties (e.g. Dutch PVV) or groups such as the English | [1, 17]
Defence League (EDL), which often describe themselves as “counter-Jihad”.
Anti-Semitic All types of anti-Semitism, regardless of association (existing literature tends | [9, 32]
to discuss this in relation to other categories).
Conspiracy Theory | ‘Themes include New World Order (NWQ), Hluminati etc. Not exclusively | [1, 30, 32]
ER, but often related to Patriot in this context.
Music Includes any ER. music such as Oi!, Rock Against Communism (RAC) etc. 1, 9, 32
Neo-Nazi Nazi references, such as to Hitler, WWIL, SS etc. 1, 9, 16
Patriot US-centric, including groups such as “Birthers”, militia, anti-government, | [30]
anti-immigration, opposition to financial system. Some of these themes are
not exclusive to ER.
Political Party Primarily European parties such as the BNP, FPO, Jobbik, NPD, PVV, | [1, 10, 18]
Swedish Democrats, UKIP etc. Many of these parties are also categorized
as Populist.
Populist Broader category that includes various themes such as anti-EU, anti- | [3, 24]
establishment, anti-state/government, anti-immigration (as with Patriot,
some of these are not exclusive to ER). Although some disagreement about
this category exists [23], we have used it as it has proved convenient for
categorizing certain groups that span multiple themes.
Revisionist References to Holocaust/W WII denial. Closely associated with Neo-Nazi. 9, 16, 32]
Street Movement Groups such as the EDL, Autonome Nationalisten, Spreelichter, Anti-Antifa | [1, 18]
etc.
White Nationalist | References to white nationalism and supremacism, also used to characterize | [9, 16, 32]
political parties such as the BNP or Jobbik.

 

 

 

constructed using the seed vocabulary. In both stages, short
documents containing < 10 terms were excluded. We use m,
and m, to refer to the number of seed and related channel
document vectors in a particular data set.

Topic modelling is concerned with the discovery of latent
semantic structure or topics within a text corpus, which
can be derived from co-occurrences of words and documents
[31]. Popular methods include probabilistic models such as
latent Dirichlet allocation (LDA) [6], or matrix factoriza-
tion techniques such as Non-negative matrix factorization
(NMF) [21]. We initially evaluated both LDA and NMF-
based methods with the seed channel document representa-
tions described above (the former was applied to TF vec-
tors). However, as in our previous work, NMF was found
to produce the most readily-interpretable results, which ap-
peared to be due to the tendency of LDA to discover topics
that over-generalized [11, 25]. We were aware of the pres-
ence of smaller groups of channels associated with multiple
languages in both data sets, and opted for specificity rather
than generality by applying NMF to the TF-IDF channel
vectors. As we found previously, the IDF component en-
sured a lower ranking for less discriminating terms, thus
leading to the discovery of more specific topics.

To allow the seed channel vectors to determine the topic ba-
sis vectors, we undertook the process in two stages. Firstly,
we generate topics for the seeds:

1. Construct an n x m, term-document matrix V,, where
each column contains a seed channel TF-IDF vector.

2. NMF is applied to V, to produce two factors; W;, an
n x T matrix containing topic basis vectors and H,,
aT x ms matrix containing the topic assignments or
weights for each seed channel document.

For both data sets, this results in a set of basis vectors con-
sisting of both ER and non-ER topics. The second stage
involves producing topic assignments for the related chan-
nel vectors:

1. Construct an n x m, term-document matrix V, con-
taining the related channel TF-IDF vectors.

2. Generate a corresponding T' x m, topic weights matrix
H, by transforming V, according to the W; model.

The latter step was achieved with a single outer iteration
of the H non-negative least squares sub-problem from the
approach by Lin et al. [22]. As the basis vectors matrix Ws
was fixed, only one outer iteration was necessary in order to
generate an approximation of a converged H,., thus permit-
ting large related channel matrices to be factorized given the
initial NMF operation on a far smaller seed matrix. In both
cases, to address the instability introduced by random ini-
tialization in standard NMF, we employed the deterministic
NNDSVD initialization method [7].

4.3 Topic and Channel Categorization

As discussed earlier in Section 2.1, some prior work has pro-
posed generic categories for use with YouTube videos and
channels. However, as these studies have focused on the
categorization of mainstream videos, they are not sufficient
for the present analysis where categories specifically associ-
ated with the extreme right are required. In Section 2.2, we
discuss prior work that characterized online extreme right
activity using a number of proposed categories, but as indi-
cated earlier, no definitive set of categories is agreed upon
in this domain [5]. Therefore, we propose a categorization
based on various schema found in a selection of academic lit-
erature on the extreme right, where this category selection
is particularly suited to the ER videos and channels we have
found on YouTube. Some categories are clearly delineated
while others are less distinct, reflecting the complicated ide-
ological make-up and thus fragmented nature of groups and
sub-groups within the extreme right [16]. In such cases,
we have proposed categories that are as specific as possible
while also accommodating a number of disparate themes and

groups. Details of the categories employed can be found in
Table 1.

As both data sets contained various non-ER channels, we
also created a corresponding set of non-ER. categories con-
sisting of a selection of the general YouTube categories as of
June 2013, in addition to other categories that we deemed
appropriate following an inspection of these channels and
associated topics. These non-ER categories were:

e Entertainment e Politics
¢ Gaming e Religion
° Military e Science & Education
e Music
e Sport
e News & Current Af
fairs e Television

Having produced a set of T topics for a data set, we then
proceeded to categorize them. For each topic, we manually
inspected the high-ranking topic terms from the correspond-
ing vector in W,, in addition to profiles and uploaded videos
for a selection of seed channels most closely assigned to the
topic, according to their weights in H;. Multiple categories
were assigned to topics where necessary, as using a single
category per topic would have been too restrictive while also
not reflecting the often multi-faceted nature of most topics
that were identified. In many cases, categories for topics
were clearly identifiable, with a separation between ER and
non-ER. categories. For example, an English Defence League
(EDL) topic was categorized as Anti-Islam and Street. Move-
ment, while a topic having high-ranking terms such as “gui-
tar” and “band” was categorized as Music. For certain topics,
this separation was more ambiguous, where the channels as-
signed to a particular topic consisted of a mixture of both
ER and non-ER channels. A combination of both ER and
non-ER, categories were assigned in such cases.

The set of categorized topics was then used to label both
seed and related channels, using the channel topic assign-
ment weights found in the H matrices. This supports the
potential assignment of multiple categories to a single chan-
nel. To achieve this, it was first necessary to determine a
weight threshold w for selecting discriminating topics to be
used in the categorization of a particular channel. Using a

Topics

Categories

  
 
 

Neo-Nazi

   
    
 
  

hitler, adolf,
reich

Revisionist

cover, guitar,

acoustic

 

(a) Categories assigned to topics.

Channels

Channel 1
Channel 2

(b} Channel H weights for topics.

Topics

     

hitler, adolf,
reich

 
        

cover, guitar,
acoustic

Channels

Channel 1
Channel 2

(c) Channels categorized using topics where H > w (in this
example, w = 0.05).

Categories

       

Neo-Nazi

 

Figure 2: Topic and Channel categorization process.

range of values for w, we calculated yp, the mean number
of topics per channel with H weight > w, and selected the
value for w where p =~ 1; the minimum number of topics
required for categorization. As we performed NMF in two
stages to produce H, and H,. for seed and related channels
respectively, two corresponding ws; and w, thresholds were
generated due to the dependency of the H weights’ upper
bound on the input matrices V. Using these thresholds, each
channel was categorized as follows:

1. Select all topics where the channel’s corresponding row
weights in H are > w.

2. Add each selected topic weight to the totals maintained
for the topic’s corresponding categories.

3. Rank these categories in descending order based on
their totals across all selected topics, and assign the
highest ranked category to the channel. Multiple cat-
egories are assigned in the event of a tie.

A simple example illustrating the complete process of map-
ping of channels to categories is shown in Figure 2. We
found that a certain number of channels, both seed and re-
lated, had a flat profile with relatively low weights (< w) for
all topics; these could be considered as grey sheep. Further
analysis found this to be due to factors such as the original
documents being short or containing few unique terms. As
we were unable to reliably categorize such channels, they
were excluded from all subsequent analysis. Separately, al-
though the NMF process often identified topics with high-
ranking discriminating terms in languages other than that
of the data set, a small number of topics with less discrimi-
nating general language terms were also found. As it would
have been difficult to distinguish between ER and non-ER.
channels closely associated with these topics, these were also
excluded. Further details on the w thresholds and numbers
of excluded channels are provided in Section 5.

5. THE ER FILTER BUBBLE

In this section, we discuss the filter bubble analysis of the
English and German language YouTube data sets. The ex-
perimental methodology is as follows:

1. Generate an aggregated ranking of related channels for
each seed channel.

2. Generate TF-IDF channel document vectors, and iden-
tify topics using NMF.

3. Categorize the identified topics according to the set
defined in Table 1.

4. Categorize the channels based on their topic weights
in H.

5. Investigate whether an extreme right filter bubble is
present.

For Step 5 above, we define an extreme right filter bubble in
terms of the extent to which the related channels for a par-
ticular extreme right seed channel also feature extreme right
content. It has been shown that the position of a video in a
related video list plays a critical role in the click through rate
[33]. Therefore, we investigate the presence of a filter bub-
ble using the top & ranked related channels, with increasing
values of k € [1,3,5,7, 10], as follows.

For each ER. seed channel:

1. Select the top & ranked related channels, filtering any
excluded channels as defined in Section 4.3. Seed chan-
nels with no remaining related channels following fil-
tering are not considered for rank k.

2. Calculate the total proportion of each category as-
signed to the < & related channels.

Then, for each ER. category:

1. Select all seed channels to which the category has been
assigned.

2. Calculate the mean proportion of each related category
associated with these seed channels.

We consider a filter bubble to exist for a particular ER. cat-
egory when its highest ranking related categories, in terms
of their mean proportions, are also ER categories.

5.1 English language categories

From the total number of channels in the English language
data set, we generated 24,611 seed and 1,376,924 related
channel documents, using a corresponding seed-based vo-
cabulary of 39,492 terms. The TF-IDF matrices V; and
V, were then generated for seed and related documents re-
spectively, and topics were identified by applying NMF to
V;. To determine the number of topics T', we experimented
with values of T in [10,100] to produce topics that were
as specific as possible, given prior knowledge of the pres-
ence of smaller groups of channels associated with multiple
languages within both data sets. This led to the selection
of T' = 80, as larger values resulted in topic splits rather
than the emergence of unseen topics. Of these, 27 ER. top-
ics (33.75%), 39 non-ER topics (48.75%), 8 topics that were
a combination of ER. and non-ER categories (10%), and 6
topics based on general terms of a separate language (7.5%)
were found.

 

   
  
 

—— Seed
—— Related

Mean topics

Topics =~ 1

 

 

 

0.01 0.02 0.03 0.04 0.05 0.06 007 0.08 0.09
w
Figure 3: English mean topics per channel at ws, w, in
(0.01, 0.09]. ws; and w, were set to 0.03 and 0.08 respectively.

These 80 topics were then categorized according to the set
defined in Table 1, which permitted the subsequent catego-
rization of the seed and related channels using their corre-
sponding H, and H, topic weights. As described in Section
4.3, we first generated the weights thresholds ws; and wr.
Figure 3 contains the mean number of topics per channel
p with H weight > w, for values of w in [0.01, 0.09]. Us-
ing 4: =~ 1 as the selection criterion resulted in values of
0.03 and 0.08 for ws and w, respectively. Using these, we
excluded 8,225 (33.42%) seed and 482,226 (35.66%) related
grey sheep channels that could not be categorized. Related
channels ranked at & > 10 were also excluded, and all non-
ER. seed channels were removed from the candidate seed
set. The remaining 6,573 ER seed and their 22,980 related
 

ER-Anti-Islam
im ER-Conspiracy Theory

0.65 __ER-Street Movement
5 NER-Entertainment
eS NER-Religion
8
oO 04>
2
Qa
c
oO
oD
= 0.27

| he A Wt ad

 

 

 

(a) Anti-Islam

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

ER-Music
| ER-White Nationalist
0.65 NER-Entertainment
Ss PY NER-Music
2
8
o 0.45
2
Q
Cc
o
®
= 0.27
| ol al il u
t t 1 1 i
1 3 5 7 10
k
(b) Music
|| ER-Conspiracy Theory
(I ER-Patriot
0.65 HB ER—Political Party
Ss | ER-Populist
2 | ER-White Nationalist
g NER-Entertainment
oO 0.44 | NER-News & Current Affairs
Q
Cc
o
®
7 | i |
oo. | I | hoa
t t 1 1 i
1 3 5 7 10

k
(c) Populist

Figure 4: English mean category proportions of top & ranked
related channels (& € [1,3,5,7,10]), for selected seed ER
categories.

channels were used to calculate the mean related category
proportions for each ER. category.

Figure 4 contains plots for three ER categories that we have
selected for more detailed analysis, where ER and non-ER.
categories have been prefixed with ER- and NER- respec-
tively. To assist visual interpretation, we have omitted any
weakly related categories whose mean proportion < 0.06 for
a particular & ranking. From inspecting these plots, two
initial observations can be made; (1) the seed category is
the dominant related category for all values of k, and (2) al-
though related category diversity increases at lower & rank-

ings with the introduction of certain non-ER. categories, ER.
categories consistently have the strongest presence. In the
case of Anti-Islam seed channels, it appears that the top
ranked related channels (k = 1) are mostly affiliated with
various groups from the UK and USA. Street Movement re-
lated channels at this rank are associated with the English
Defence League (EDL), a movement opposed to the alleged
spread of radical Islamism within the UK [18]. Channels
from various international individuals and groups that often
describe themselves as “counter-Jihad” can also be observed
[17]. The Conspiracy Theory and non-ER Religion cate-
gories appear to be associated with channels based in the
USA, where the dominance of these categories at lower rank-
ings (excluding the seed category) suggests that the channels
become progressively more US-centric.

The ER Music seed channels usually upload video and audio
recordings of high-profile groups associated with the extreme
right. For example, content from bands such as Skrewdriver
(UK) or Landser (Germany) can be found, along with other
groups from genres such as Oi!, RAC (Rock Against Com-
munism) and NSBM (National Socialist Black Metal) [1, 8].
Given this, the consistent presence of the White Nationalist
related category would appear logical. At the same time, we
also observe that non-ER. Music becomes more evident as k
increases, perhaps reflecting the overlap between music gen-
res. For example, someone who is a fan of NSBM is often
a fan of other metal music that would not be categorized
as ER. For Populist seed categories, the related categories
generally appear more diverse. Channels affiliated with po-
litical parties can be observed, including the Eurosceptic
United Kingdom Independence Party (UKIP) or the British
National Party (BNP), where the latter is also considered
as White Nationalist [3, 24]. Opposition to establishment
organizations such as the EU may be a link to similar op-
position within the Patriot and Conspiracy Theory related
categories that are also present [30], while also explaining the
presence of the non-ER News & Current Affairs category. It
should also be mentioned that our definition of Populist is
broad and spans multiple themes (Table 1), where a certain
amount of disagreement about this category exists [23].

5.2 German language categories

A total of 2,766 seed and 177,868 related channel documents
were generated from the German language data set. Topics
were then identified by applying NMF to the corresponding
TF-IDF matrices. As before, we experimented with values
of T in [10,100], and selected T = 60 given a similar ob-
servation of redundant topic splits for larger values of T.
Of these, 33 ER topics (55%), 20 non-ER topics (33.33%), 2
topics that were a combination of ER. and non-ER categories
(3.33%), and 5 topics based on general terms of a separate
language (8.33%) were found. Having categorized these top-
ics, we calculated the mean number of topics per channel jz
with H weight > w, for values of w in [0.01, 0.09], as seen in
Figure 5. Values of 0.06 and 0.087 were found for w; and w,
respectively at jz =~ 1. We excluded 785 (28.38%) seed and
56,565 (31.8%) related grey sheep channels that could not be
categorized, in addition to related channels ranked at k > 10
and non-ER seed channels. The remaining 1,123 ER seed
and 4,973 related (ER and non-ER, k < 10) channels were
used to calculate the mean related category proportions for
each ER. category.
Figure 6 contains plots for three ER categories that we have
selected for in-depth analysis. As seen in Figure 4, the seed
category is the dominant related category for all values of k,
and the ER related category presence is consistently stronger
than that of the non-ER categories, notwithstanding the in-
crease in diversity. The Populist and Political Party related
categories are prominent for Anti-Islam, given the inclu-
sion of channels affiliated with parties such as the National
Democratic Party of Germany (NPD), the Pro-Bewegung
collective, and the Freedom Party of Austria (FPO); all
strong opponents of immigration, particularly by Muslims
(1, 3, 17).

 

 
   
 
 

64
—— Seed
—— Related

B44

a

9

£

<

oS

oO

=

24
Topics =~ 1

 

 

 

Figure 5: German mean topics per channel at ws, wr in
(0.01, 0.09]. ws and wy were set to 0.06 and 0.087 respec-
tively.

This data set also features many ER Music seed channels
that upload recordings of high-profile groups, with the main
difference being the prominence of the Neo-Nazi related cat-
egory for all rankings. These recordings and videos, along
with other non-music videos uploaded by these channels,
often feature recognizable Nazi imagery. Separately, chan-
nels that upload videos associated with groups that have
alleged ER ties, for example, Béhse Onkelz or Frei. Wild [1],
may explain in part the presence of the non-ER Music cat-
egory, given the mainstream success of these groups. This
may also be explained by material associated with hip-hop
groups such as “n’Socialist Soundsystem”, which provide an
alternative to traditional ER. music based on rock and folk.
The close relationship with Music is also present for the
Neo-Nazi seed category, although further related diversity
can be observed. Seed channels featuring footage of German
participation in WWII, including speeches by high-ranking
members of the Nazi party, are likely to be the source of the
White Nationalist and Revisionist related categories. We
can safely assume that the prominence of Music is responsi-
ble for the appearance of its non-ER, counterpart here.

5.3. Discussion

We conclude our filter bubble analysis by measuring the
mean proportions for the seed ER categories as a whole,
where the possible aggregated related categories were (1)
the same ER category as that of the seed, (2) a different
ER category, or (3) a non-ER category. The results for both
data sets can be found in Figure 7. As with the individual
seed categories, an ER filter bubble is also clearly identi-
fiable at the aggregate level. Although the increase in di-
versity for lower & rankings introduces a certain proportion

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

ER-Anti-Islam
HB ER-Political Party
0.65 | ER-Populist
5 NER-Entertainment
eS __NER-News & Current Affairs
°°
S 0.44
2
a
Cc
wo
a
= 0.24
0.0 i
1 1 1 1 1
1 3 5 7 10
k
(a) Anti-Islam
ER-Music
| ER-Neo-Nazi
0.65 |__ ER-White Nationalist
Ss | NER-Music
g
8
© 0.4-
2
Qa
Cc
wo
a
= 0.24
0.04 qt i i l
1 3 5 7 10
k
(b} Music
ER-Music
| ER-Neo-Nazi
0.65 | _ ER-Populist
5 __ER-Revisionist
2 | ER-White Nationalist
g | NER-Music
© 0.4-
2
Qa
Cc
wo
a
= 0.24 | | |
0.0 |
1 3 5 7 10
k

(c} Neo-Nazi

Figure 6: German mean category proportions of top k
ranked related channels (k € [1,3,5, 7, 10]), for selected seed
ER. categories.

of non-ER. categories, this is always outweighed by ER cate-
gories, where the seed ER category remains dominant for all
values of k. These findings would appear to contrast those
of certain prior work where greater related video diversity
was observed [28, 33]. Although we have analyzed related
channels rather than individual videos, we might have ex-
pected to also find this behaviour at both levels. However,
it would appear this is not always true, at the very least in
the case of ER channels.
 

1.00 =

0.504 | | |
0.00 = | l
i 3 5

k

Millsame ER Category
Other ER Category
___Non-ER Category

7 10

Mean proportion
Q
Ny
or

°O

iy

a
1

 

 

 

(a) English

 

 

 

 

1.00 =
Ml same ER Category
Other ER Category
© 0.754 |_Non-ER Category
2
3
Q
2 0.504
Q
c
ow
®
= 0.255
0.00 5 = ll i |
1 3 5 ; i
k
(b) German

Figure 7: Aggregated mean category proportions of top & ranked related channels (& € [1,3,5,7, 10]), for seed ER categories.

The data retrieval process described in Section 3 involved
following related video links for only one step removed from
the corresponding seed video; no further related retrieval
was performed for related videos themselves. Of the ER
seed channels used in the filter bubble analysis in Sections
5.1 and 5.2, we identified those that appeared in top k re-
lated rankings of other ER seed channels, for k < 10; 6,186
(94%) and 1,056 (94%) such channels respectively for the
English and German language data sets. These high per-
centages allude to the presence of cycles within the related
channel graph, where retrieving additional data by following
related videos for multiple steps may have been somewhat
redundant. They also further emphasize the existence of the
filter bubble.

Separately, it might be argued that our findings merely con-
firm that YouTube’s related video recommendation process
is working correctly. However, this is precisely what we were
trying to quantify, in terms of the categories of extreme right
content to which a user may be exposed following a short
series of clicks. As a consequence, users viewing this content
may rarely be presented with an alternative perspective.

6. CONCLUSIONS AND FUTURE WORK

YouTube’s position as the most popular video sharing plat-
form has resulted in it playing an important role in the online
strategy of the extreme right, where it is used to host as-
sociated content such as music and other propaganda. We
have proposed a set of categories that may be applied to
this YouTube content, based on a review of those found in
existing academic studies of the extreme right’s ideological
make-up. Using an NMF-based topic modelling approach,
we have categorized channels according to this proposed set,
permitting the assignment of multiple categories per chan-
nel where necessary. This categorization has helped us to
identify the existence of an extreme right filter bubble, in
terms of the extent to which related channels, determined
by the videos recommended by YouTube, also belong to ex-
treme right categories. Despite the increased diversity ob-
served for lower related rankings, this filter bubble maintains
a constant presence. The influence of related rankings on
click through rate [33], coupled with the fact that the You-
Tube channels in this analysis originated from links posted

by extreme right Twitter accounts, would suggest that it is
possible for a user to be immersed in this content following
a short series of clicks.

In future work, we would like to experiment with alternative
channel representations that address the existence of noise
found with certain channels and associated topics at lower
related rankings. We would also like to perform a longer
temporal analysis in an attempt to investigate any correla-
tion between changes in this filter bubble and extreme right
activity across multiple social media platforms. Separately,
although we have used the methodology presented in this
paper to study extreme right channels, it may be interest-
ing to investigate its application to other types of extremist
political content found on YouTube.

7. ACKNOWLEDGMENTS

This research was supported by 2CENTRE, the EU funded
Cybercrime Centres of Excellence Network and Science Foun-
dation Ireland (SFI) under Grant Number SFI/12/RC/2289.

8. REFERENCES
[1] Baldauf, J., Grof, A., Rafael, S., and Wolf, J.

Zwischen Propaganda und Mimikry.

Neonazi-Strategien in Sozialen Netzwerken. Amadeu

Antonio Stiftung (2011).

Baluja, $., Seth, R., Sivakumar, D., Jing, Y., Yagnik,

J., Kumar, S., Ravichandran, D., and Aly, M. Video

suggestion and discovery for youtube: taking random

walks through the view graph. In Proc. 17th

international conference on World Wide Web, WWW

08, ACM (2008), 895-904.

[3] Bartlett, J., Birdwell, J., and Littler, M. The New
Face of Digital Populism. Demos (2011).

[4] Bell, M. Frei verfiigbarer Nazi-Rock: YouTube und die
braunen Musikanten. Der Spiegel (03 2013).

[5] Blee, K. M., and Creasap, K. A. Conservative and

Right-Wing Movements. Annual Review of Sociology

86 (2010), 269-286.

Blei, D. M., Ng, A. Y., and Jordan, M. I. Latent

dirichlet allocation. J. Mach. Learn. Res. 3 (Mar.

2003), 993-1022.

N

&
[7] Boutsidis, C., and Gallopoulos, E. SVD based

[12

[13

[14

[15

[16

[17

[18

[19

initialization: A head start for nonnegative matrix
factorization. Pattern Recogn. 41, 4 (Apr. 2008),
1350-1362.

Brown, T. 8. Subcultures, Pop Music and Politics:
Skinheads and ”Nazi Rock” in England and Germany.
Journal of Social History 38, 1 (2004), 157-178.
Burris, V., Smith, E., and Strahm, A. White
Supremacist Networks on the Internet. Sociological
Focus 33, 2 (2000), 215-235.

Caiani, M., and Wagemann, C. Online Networks of
the Italian and German Extreme Right. Information,
Communication & Society 12, 1 (2009), 66-109.
Chemudugunta, C., Smyth, P., and Steyvers, M.
Modeling General and Specific Aspects of Documents
with a Probabilistic Topic Model. In Advances in
Neural Information Processing Systems (2006),
241-248.

Conway, M., and McInerney, L. Jihadi Video and
Auto-radicalisation: Evidence from an Exploratory
YouTube Study. In Proc. 1st European Conference on
Intelligence and Security Informatics, EurolISI ’08,
Springer-Verlag (2008), 108-118.

Davidson, J., Liebald, B., Liu, J., Nandy, P.,

Van Vleet, T., Gargi, U., Gupta, S., He, Y., Lambert,
M., Livingston, B., and Sampath, D. The YouTube
video recommendation system. In Proc. 4th ACM
conference on Recommender Systems, RecSys ’10
(2010), 293-296.

Figueiredo, F., Benevenuto, F., and Almeida, J. M.
The Tube over Time: Characterizing Popularity
Growth of YouTube Videos. In Proc. 4th ACM
international conference on Web search and data
mining, WSDM ’11 (2011), 745-754.

Filippova, K., and Hall, K. B. Improved video
categorization from text metadata and user comments.
In Proc. 34th Int. ACM SIGIR Conference on
Research and development in Information Retrieval,
SIGIR ’11 (2011), 835-842.

Gerstenfeld, P. B., Grant, D. R., and Chiang, C.-P.
Hate Online: A Content Analysis of Extremist
Internet Sites. Analyses of Social Issues and Public
Policy 3, 1 (2003), 29-44.

Goodwin, M. The Roots of Extremism: The English
Defence League and the Counter-Jihad Challenge.
Chatham House (2013).

Goodwin, M., and Ramalingam, V. The New Radical
Right: Violent and Non-Violent Movements in
Europe. Institute for Strategic Dialogue (2012).
Greene, D., and Cunningham, P. Producing a Unified
Graph Representation from Multiple Social Network
Views. In Proc. 5th Annual ACM Web Science

10

[20

[22

[23

[24]

[25

[26

[27

[28]

[33]

Conference, WebSci ’13, ACM (2013), 118-121.
Hannon, J., Bennett, M., and Smyth, B.
Recommending Twitter users to follow using content
and collaborative filtering approaches. In Proc. 4th
ACM Conference on Recommender Systems
(RecSys’10) (2010), 199-206.

Lee, D. D., and Seung, H. 8. Learning the parts of
objects by non-negative matrix factorization. Nature
401 (1999), 788-791.

Lin, C.-J. Projected Gradient Methods for
Nonnegative Matrix Factorization. Neural Comput.

19, 10 (Oct. 2007), 2756-2779.

Marliére, P. Populism and the enchanted world of
*moderate politics’. openDemocracy (2013).

Mudde, C. Populist Radical Right Parties in Europe.
Cambridge University Press, 2007.

O’Callaghan, D., Greene, D., Conway, M., Carthy, J.,
and Cunningham, P. An Analysis of Interactions
Within and Between Extreme Right Communities in
Social Media. In To Appear: MSM 2012 and MUSE
2012 Postproceedings (2013).

O’Callaghan, D., Greene, D., Conway, M., Carthy, J.,
and Cunningham, P. Uncovering the Wider Structure
of Extreme Right Communities Spanning Popular
Online Networks. In Proc. 5th Annual ACM Web
Science Conference, WebSci 713 (2013), 276-285.
Pariser, E. The Filter Bubble: What the Internet Is
Hiding from You. Penguin Group USA, 2011.

Roy, 8S. D., Mei, T., Zeng, W., and Li, S.
SocialTransfer: cross-domain transfer learning from
social streams for media applications. In Proc. 20th
ACM international conference on Multimedia, MM
12, ACM (2012), 649-658.

Simonet, V. Classifying YouTube Channels: a
Practical System. In Proc. 2nd International
Workshop on Web of Linked Entities (WoLE 2013),
ACM (2013), 1295-1304.

SPLC. Ideology. Southern Poverty Law Center (2013).
Steyvers, M., and Griffiths, T. Probabilistic Topic
Models. In Latent Semantic Analysis: A Road to
Meaning., T. Landauer, D. Mcnamara, 5. Dennis, and
W. Kintsch, Eds. Laurence Erlbaum, 2006.

Tateo, L. The Italian Extreme Right On-line Network:
An Exploratory Study Using an Integrated Social
Network Analysis and Content Analysis Approach.
Journal of Computer-Mediated Communication 10, 2
(2005).

Zhou, R., Khemmarat, S., and Gao, L. The impact of
YouTube recommendation system on video views. In
Proc. 10th ACM SIGCOMM conference on Internet
measurement (2010), 404-410.
