ResearchGate

See discussions, stats, and author profiles for this publication at: https://www.researchgate.net/pu blication/325887180

Trapped in the Filter Bubble? Exploring the Influence of Google Search on the
Creative Process

Article in Journal of Interactive Advertising - June 2018

DOL: 10.1080/15252019.2018.1487810

CITATIONS READS
6 206
1 author:

Richie Barker
Deakin University
10 PUBLICATIONS 27 CITATIONS

SEE PROFILE

All content following this page was uploaded by Richie Barker on 09 October 2020.

The user has requested enhancement of the downloaded file.
mee . ~ =} Routledge
| nte ra cti ve 8 Taylor & Francis Group

Advertising Journal of Interactive Advertising

 

(tl pobcaton ofthe Amarcan Rade of Avert

os.
a Rese ISSN: (Print) 1525-2019 (Online) Journal homepage: http://www.tandfonline.com/loi/ujia20

Trapped in the Filter Bubble? Exploring the
Influence of Google Search on the Creative Process

Richie Barker

To cite this article: Richie Barker (2018): Trapped in the Filter Bubble? Exploring the
Influence of Google Search on the Creative Process, Journal of Interactive Advertising, DOI:
10.1080/15252019.2018.1487810

To link to this article: https://doi.org/10.1080/15252019.2018.1487810

i Accepted author version posted online: 20
Jun 2018.
Published online: 25 Sep 2018.

o
(sg Submit your article to this journal @

 

lil Article views: 52

 

® View Crossmark data

CrossMark

 

Full Terms & Conditions of access and use can be found at
http://www.tandfonline.com/action/journallnformation?journalCode=ujia20
JOURNAL OF INTERACTIVE ADVERTISING
https://doi.org/10.1080/15252019.2018.1487810

: Routledge

Taylor & Francis Group

 

® Check for updates.

Trapped in the Filter Bubble? Exploring the Influence of Google Search on

the Creative Process

Richie Barker ®

Deakin University, Burwood, Australia

ABSTRACT

This article explores the use of Google search by art directors and copywriters when devel-
oping creative advertisements. It aims to reveal the influence of the widely applied search
engine on creative process actions, including information gathering and ideation. In-depth
interviews with practitioners are analyzed with reference to literature on advertising creativ-

KEYWORDS
Advertising creativity;
algorithmic gatekeeping;
creative process;
personalization

ity and search engine personalization. This exploratory study argues that while serving as a
convenient means of accessing digital media content, the personalization capabilities of
Google search limit exposure to the qualitatively diverse information needed to trigger new
ideas. As such, this article provides valuable insight into the complexities of producing
advertisements in the digital media era and highlights avenues for further research into the

information-gathering strategies of creative practitioners.

A significant shift has emerged within the creative
process of advertising professionals. Where once
advertising art directors and copywriters relied on
mass media forms of communication to build the
repository of knowledge and inspiration required to
develop advertisements that express attention-grabbing
novelty, these specialist communicators now have
access to an abundance of informational raw materi-
als. This transformation through digital networks
offers the benefit of immediate access to the cultural
symbols and audience insights that support the pro-
duction of creative advertising. A limited number of
studies have considered the use of digital media in the
creative process (Wagler 2013; Barker 2018). However,
the way in which creative practitioners “search” the
online realm while completing research and ideation
tasks has yet to be explored. This article fills this
research gap by presenting a valuable and original
contribution to understanding how using a particular
digital media technology influences the formation of
creative advertisements. It does not seek to suggest
that Google search is the only means with which
external knowledge and inspiration is drawn into the
creative process but instead argues that the search
engine influences the everyday work practices of art

directors and copywriters in a series of distinctive and
largely obscured ways.

As specialist communication professionals, advertis-
ing art directors and copywriters—commonly referred
to as “creatives”—use digital platforms to draw inspir-
ation from existing media content, check facts, and
collect insights into consumer behavior. A companion
study (Barker 2018) to the one discussed in this article
reveals that practitioners access a range of online
sources when building knowledge or seeking inspir-
ation. These include blogs, forums, social media, news
websites, and video-sharing sites. But how is informa-
tion discovered or recalled when the source of a par-
ticular form of information is not immediately
known? As is the case with the majority of Internet
users, Google search emerges as a “go to” resource for
information discovery and recovery tasks. The world’s
most visited search engine has become a fixture of
everyday life in most personal and professional con-
texts due in part to the perception that it can “read
our minds” (Vaidhyanathan 2011, p. 52). However,
concerns have been raised about the algorithmic filter-
ing deployed by Google to preempt users’ needs and
personalize their search results. An established body
of literature argues that the search engine can limit

 

CONTACT Richie Barker @ richie.barker@deakin.edu.au @ Deakin University, School of Communication and Creative Arts, Faculty of Arts and Education,

221 Burwood Highway, Burwood, VIC 3125, Australia.

Richie Barker (PhD, Monash University) is a lecturer in communication in the School of Communication and Creative Arts, Faculty of Arts and Education,

Deakin University.
© 2018 American Academy of Advertising
2 @) R BARKER

knowledge building and creative thinking by delimit-
ing access to unfamiliar or challenging digital media
content (Hillis, Petit, and Jarrett 2013; Bozdag 2013;
Vaidhyanathan 2011; Pariser 2011). The existence and
implications of this “filter bubble” phenomenon, as
Pariser (2011) has described it, have yet to be
explored with regard to the creative process actions of
advertising art directors and copywriters—professional
communicators who are required to work across vari-
ous cultural domains and develop surprising rather
than conventional “big
advertisements.

Using an inductive approach, this article explores
perceptions of the role and influence of Google search
in the creative process by drawing on in-depth inter-
views with 18 Australian art directors and copywriters.
A qualitative method has been employed in this
exploratory study to interrogate the subjective and
complex phenomenon of information gathering dur-
ing the creative process. A review of literature on
advertising creativity and algorithmic filtering is fol-
lowed by an explanation of the research method.
Findings based on participant perceptions of the
search engine’s role, influence, and functioning are
then presented. The study reveals largely ambivalent
views of Google search’s impact on the creative pro-
cess. While a series of benefits were noted, concerns
about the restrictive nature of search engine use were
commonly articulated. In addition, the majority of
participants communicated limited awareness of the
way in which Google filters its search results. The
implications of using Google search in the creative
process are explored in the article’s Discussion sec-
tion, which argues for greater creative practitioner
understanding of the algorithmic processes that shape
a key information-gathering strategy. Limitations of
the study and avenues for further research are also
stated. The study provides insight into changes to cre-
ative process actions at a time when the production of
creative advertising that is capable of engaging
increasingly elusive and sophisticated audiences has
never been more important.

ideas” for creative

Literature Review
Information Gathering during the Creative Process

Advertising creativity thrives on information. Those
specifically responsible for developing creative con-
cepts for advertisements—art directors and copy-
writers—are expected to be aware of the contextual
factors that surround a creative brief in addition to
the existing media texts that form the starting point

for a novel variation. Previous empirical studies have
identified the sociocultural contours of advertising
creativity, including the influence of information
drawn from cultural domains, on the ideation tasks of
art directors and copywriters (Vanden Bergh and
Stuhlfaut 2006; Stuhlfaut 2011; Barker 2018).
Collectively, these studies contribute to a view of
advertising creativity that moves beyond the examin-
ation of individual actions yet does not sufficiently
attend to the influence of specific digital media tech-
nologies used by creative professionals. While there
are a number of ways of delineating advertising cre-
ativity, stage-based models provide a_ practicable
means of identifying actions within the creative pro-
cess. The stage-based approach developed by mid-
20th-century advertising practitioner James Webb
Young, which has much in common with Wallas’s
classic model (Lubart 2001), identifies five creative
process phases:

e Immersion—A research stage that includes taking
an interest in a broad spectrum of sources and the
gathering of informational “raw materials”

e Digestion—The act of looking for relationships
between collected materials

e Incubation—Turning the
relaxed mind

e Illumination—When _ the
“eureka” moment happens

e Verification—Making the idea fit its purpose and
submitting it for criticism (Young [1940] 2003; see
Figure 1).

problem over to a

idea arrives or the

Bengtson (1982) has described Young’s model as
having “a profound effect on how advertising practi-
tioners, educators, and students conceptualize idea
generation and its attendant processes” (p. 4), while
Belch et al. (2014) describe the model as one of the
most “popular approaches to getting ideas” (p. 321).
While influential and broadly indicative of creative
process actions, the approach has its limitations.
Young envisaged his model as an assembly line means
of developing creative outcomes, when in practice
these phases often occur out of sequence or concur-
rently (Bengtson 1982). For example, contemporary
practitioners can complete research tasks—positioned

Immersion B Digestion E> Incubation » Illumination »

 

Figure 1. Young's (1940/2003) five-stage model of the cre-
ative process.
by Young ([1940] 2003) in the immersion phase—at
any time during the creative process due to the ubi-
quity and convenience of accessing information via
digital media platforms.

Despite its limitations, a stage-based approach to
identifying creative process actions provides an appro-
priate framework for investigating the role of search
engines in advertising production as it highlights the
role of research—the act of drawing on knowledge
from external sources during what Young ([1940]
2003) would consider to be the immersion phase. In
this article, the term research refers to informal infor-
mation-gathering actions undertaken by creatives, as
opposed to market research findings. These actions
may be task specific—for example, the search for
information that responds directly to a current project
(or “brief,” to use industry parlance)—or part of an
ongoing process of collecting and storing sources of
knowledge or inspiration that can be applied to future
creative tasks. In the past, broadcast and print media
served as knowledge-building and inspiration-collect-
ing resources; in the contemporary era, networked
digital media exhibit the capacity to introduce a tor-
rent of information into the creative process. Search
engine use also emerges as an influence on the cre-
ative process stages of digestion and incubation. It is
during these stages that new associations among exist-
ing ideas are commonly formed, based on the crea-
tive’s lived experience and exposure to external
stimuli, until a suitably novel and appropriate creative
solution is identified. Empirical research on practi-
tioner perceptions of creative process efficacy is also
relevant to this study. Importantly, existing literature
has linked creative risk-taking behavior to the devel-
opment of novel advertisements (El-Murad and West
2004; Nyilasy, Canniford, and Kreshel 2013). While
networked digital media open up abundant opportuni-
ties for building knowledge and triggering inspiration,
the rule-based structuring of this information has the
potential to limit exposure to media content that may
be perceived by the search engine’s algorithmic proc-
esses to conflict with its profile of the user; in other
words, to limit the user to a filter bubble that reinfor-
ces conformity rather than disruption.

Personalization and Algorithmic Gatekeeping

In response to the growing amount of media content
produced for and by the Web, algorithms—procedures
or sets of rules that solve well-defined computational
problems (Cormen et al. 2009)—are used by digital
platforms to filter information on behalf of users.

JOURNAL OF INTERACTIVE ADVERTISING © 3

Prime among these is Google search, which has
achieved widespread use through its application of
algorithms that make judgments about the relevance
of Internet pages. Google emerged as a widely
deployed search engine in the early 21st century due
to its PageRank algorithm (Franceschet 2011), which
sought to place pages with the most high-ranking
inbound links toward the top of search result listings.
While this algorithm established a benchmark for the
concept of relevance, filtering based on what is essen-
tially a voting system produced search results that
were largely generic in nature. Since 2007, this condi-
tion has been addressed with the introduction of per-
sonalization algorithms, filtering processes designed to
tailor information to the user’s search intention based
on Google’s knowledge of previous online behaviors
(Pariser 2011). For instance, a Google search for the
term “jaguar” may deliver results on the Central and
South American cat for a Google user who has been
profiled as a travel enthusiast, while someone consid-
ered to be a car lover may receive results that relate
to the English automobile. A range of factors or
“signals” are applied by personalization algorithms to
achieve this form of preemption, including informa-
tion about the device used to access the Web, the
Internet Protocol (IP) address of the user, and search
history (Google n.d.).

While Google has not publicly explained the spe-
cific ways in which a user’s profile shapes his or her
search results, it is clear that this form of filtering rep-
resents a significant technological transformation for
professional communicators. Both PageRank and per-
sonalization algorithms order the abundant content
provided by networked digital media platforms and,
in doing so, function as algorithmic gatekeepers
(Bozdag 2013). Importantly, this determination of
access to online content presents distinctive forms of
media bias. Key among these is a bias toward media
content the user favors or is familiar with. When
applied by technologies such as Google search, per-
sonalization provides a convenient means for art
directors and copywriters to access facts, ideas, and
cultural representations that can be reworked into
new advertisements. An obvious example is the tailor-
ing of search results that reflect the user’s geographic
location. However, Eli Pariser (2011, p. 9) states that
personalization algorithms place Web users in a filter
bubble in which digital media technologies provide
information that reinforces the status quo:

Personalization is about building an environment that

consists entirely of the adjacent unknown—the sports
trivia or political punctuation marks that don’t really
4 @) ® BARKER

shake our schemata but feel like new information.
The personalized environment is very good at
answering the questions we have but not at
suggesting questions or problems that are out of our
sight altogether.

Under these conditions, opportunities for “radical
encounters” with new information, as Vaidhyanathan
(2011, p. 182) puts it, are diminished, because users
are limited to ideas with which they are already con-
sciously or unconsciously familiar. In the context of
advertising creativity, the question arises of whether
the creative professional’s access to unfamiliar or
unexpected media content is diminished and thus the
imperative of being “fully immersed in the widest pos-
sible set of cultural currents” (Nixon 2003, p. 80)—
both when looking for sources of knowledge and
inspiration on either a task-specific or ongoing
basis—is reduced.

Method

A qualitative research method was selected to investi-
gate the role and influence of Google search on adver-
tising creativity through discourse analysis of
practitioners’ insider accounts. The creative process is,
in part, a subjective phenomenon that lends itself to
analysis based on detailed descriptions of perceptions
and experiences. Semistructured one-on-one inter-
views were selected as the research instrument, a style
commonly used to collect individual experiences from
study participants on a specific topic. In-depth inter-
views allowed a rapport to build between the
researcher and each participant, and for discussion
to flow naturally. An interview schedule (see
Appendix 1) was used to guide open-ended questions
about the role, influence, and functioning of Google
search. The semistructured format enabled questions
to be varied to suit different participants and their cir-
cumstances while still covering the same conceptual
ground, thus allowing comparisons to be made among
participants’ perceptions and experiences (Hennink,
Hutter, and Bailey 2011).

Interviews were conducted with a purposive sample
of 18 advertising art directors and copywriters in the
Australian cities of Sydney, Melbourne, and Brisbane
(see Appendix 2). These cities were selected because
they generate the majority (85%) of Australia’s adver-
tising revenue (Allday 2014, p. 19). Practitioners
whose contact details were publicly available on adver-
tising industry websites and social media sites were e-
mailed an invitation to take part in the study.
Participants were no longer recruited when sufficient
data were gathered to represent the breadth and depth

of the phenomenon being investigated and previously
collected data could be confirmed and understood
(Trainor and Graue 2013). Study participants ranged
in age from 18 to 54. Twelve art directors and six
copywriters were interviewed. On average, participants
had worked in advertising for 15.3 years, which indi-
cates extensive industry experience, as well as likely
exposure to changes in creative practice over time as a
result of digital technologies.

To ensure a consistent approach in the analysis of
participant discourse, examination of interview tran-
scripts followed a three-stage process of data reduc-
tion, data display, and conclusion drawing and
verification (Miles and Huberman 1994). As part of
the data-reduction stage, information from the tran-
scripts was categorized according to perceptions of
Google use, perceptions of the influence of Google
search on the creative process, and awareness of the
search engine’s filtering processes. Summarized ver-
sions of participants’ perspectives and experiences
were then organized within these categories. From
this point, codes were developed from within the data
using analytical induction (Bertrand and Hughes
2005). The data-display stage saw the development of
a matrix that presented coded data within analytical
categories in addition to a summary of the inferences
drawn from this analysis. The conclusion and verifica-
tion stage involved extrapolating meanings and impli-
cations from the emergent findings. The findings were
then confirmed by returning to the interview tran-
scripts to review the coding analysis and cross-check
the conclusions drawn. A_ social constructionist
approach to discourse analysis in which “emphasis is
on the role of the narrative in making sense of experi-
ence and constructing the self” was adopted to inter-
pret participant perceptions of their lived experience
(Wood and Kroger 2000, p. 104). The development of
the study’s findings acknowledged the discursive status
of the data as analytical objects; that is, findings were
constructed with an awareness that differences may
exist between how respondents act in practice and
how they talk about their actions (Bertrand and
Hughes 2005).

Findings

Analysis of transcripts revealed three main findings
regarding participant perceptions of Google search.
The first reveals that Google search is used as a means
of accessing digital media content during research
tasks and, to a lesser extent, to consciously trigger
ideation. A second and seemingly paradoxical finding
reveals that Google search was commonly perceived
to hinder aspects of the creative process. The third
finding indicates that participants possessed largely
incomplete understandings of the ways in which the
search engine filters information on their behalf.

A Window onto the World

The widespread use of Google was established with all
respondents saying they use the search engine at some
point in the creative process. Responses to questions
about which search engines were used included “just
Google,” “exclusively Google,” and “Google, like
everyone else.” One respondent placed considerable
value on the efficacy of Google, as opposed to other
search engines, saying, “You almost don’t want to risk
it with anything else.” These statements suggest the
term “search engine” is predominantly associated with
Google, despite the availability of alternatives such as
Bing, Yahoo!, and DuckDuckGo.

When discussing the benefits of search engine use,
participants commonly said that Google enabled them
to find research materials, including visual sources of
inspiration, social media content, and information on
a client’s product or service. For instance:

You'll get to find out about little fashion houses in
Denmark who are doing amazing stuff, and you can
take inspiration from that... . [Google has] become a
portal to the rest of the world, which is pretty
amazing, whereas previously you would get Italian
Vogue to have a look at that [content]. (AD8)

I’m always looking for new sources [of inspiration];
generally, Google is the first port of call. (AD2)

Google search was also discussed as a means of
finding images that were capable of triggering new
associations:

[Google] just becomes [the creative process], because
I have the thought and then I just go to Google and
Google Image it. So I put the keywords in and
Google Image it and up comes random stuff around
those keywords. (CW5)

I’ve just been recently working on a beer label, so I
just simply Google images, just googling “cool beer
labels,” so that’s probably a recent example. Just
getting yourself into that headspace. (AD4)

Other participants described Google search as use-
ful when they lacked knowledge of a particular subject
or were unable to develop new ideas on the basis of
personal experience. The following observations exem-

plify this perspective:

JOURNAL OF INTERACTIVE ADVERTISING © 5

I might be thinking of an idea for [a cola company],
and ... we know the demographic really likes
NASCAR racing. I don’t know a lot about NASCAR
racing, so ’'d type “NASCAR racing” into Google and
look at the images just in case there was, “Oh wow, they
use really interesting lights on the cars, don’t they,”
there is an idea in that with the [product’s] cans ... just
seeing if there is something I can grasp onto. (AD3)

If I get stuck, I definitely do a simple Google word
search. When I see pictures, sometimes they are still
images, but I can still see them move, [they] come to
life. (CW6)

Google search was also described as a means of sol-
idifying an embryonic
one copywriter:

idea. In the words of

I'm doing this [campaign] for [a global car
manufacturer], which is an idea for their hydrogen
cell car that they've got, and the only emission is
water. So I had this idea about making bottled water
that’s come from the exhaust pipe of the car. I got
online and researched if anyone had ever drunk it out
of the fuel pipe, and you can... . I can’t really
imagine doing that idea without Google. (CW4)

The majority of participants discussed Google
solely in terms of its ability to access unknown infor-
mation: the act of discovery. However, there were
exceptions, with a small number of participants dis-
cussing Google’s ability to recall known information:

I just Google anything to the point that—nowadays, I
don’t even know if intelligence is now even having
knowledge or knowing where to find it quickly, so it’s
sometimes in between, because you often find
yourself, when you don’t come up with the answer or
something in a couple of seconds, I will go back to
googling it rather than thinking it for about five to
ten minutes. (AD9)

Google search was also identified as a means of
checking the originality of a creative concept, an
action that falls into the verification stage of Young’s
([1940] 2003) model of creative process. This action,
which was specifically identified by three participants
as the “Google check,” was described as occurring
when search terms that reflected the main idea of an
in-development creative concept are typed into the
search query box. This occurred prior to presentation
to the client to determine if an idea had already been
applied in an existing execution. The existence of this
action highlights the value placed on originality when
seeking to produce creative advertisements and reveals
an unanticipated use of search engines in the cre-
ative process.

While it is unsurprising that Google search plays a
prominent role in information gathering given its
6 @) R BARKER

position as the most commonly visited website in
Europe, North America, and Oceania (Information
Geographies 2014), this finding evinces the nature of
its various uses in a specialist area of creative practice.
Importantly, this finding reveals the application of
Google search in Young’s ([1940] 2003) immersion
stage when informational raw materials are gathered,
as well as during digestion and incubation stages
when new associations are formed. The use of Google
to check the originality of a creative concept, while
only mentioned on a few occasions, reveals another
way search has been adopted into the creative process
that is unique to the digital media era. Vanden Bergh
and Stuhlfaut (2006) have discussed the transmission
of information from cultural domains into the lived
experience of creative practitioners during the creative
process. For pre-digital era creative practitioners, this
external knowledge and inspiration was drawn from
legacy media, such as books on award-winning adver-
tisements or even library-based reference material. For
contemporary practitioners, this information is avail-
able immediately online and accessible via search, an
information-gathering platform with distinctive affor-
dances and influences.

A Hindrance to Creativity

The majority of participants said search engine use
was capable of hindering creativity, with a variety of
justifications offered to support this perception. One
of these was the belief that search engines were an
inefficient way to use the time allocated for the cre-
ative process. For instance, one participant stated:

Often it doesn’t yield much. It’s amazing. You
imagine Google to be this omnipotent thing, but it’s
pretty blunt often. (CW1)

This senior copywriter went on to discuss his pref-
erence for “surfing” the Internet by accessing web
pages via links on websites he trusts as opposed to
using the “blank canvas of Google.” This participant
and a small number of other creatives who took part
in the study discussed a preference for using and
referring back to their own repository of research
materials, such as note-taking programs or the more
traditional notebook.

What I have used in the past ... are big books which
I just fill with imagery. Over my career I have ripped
different things out and pasted them in. It’s random
stuff, like spaghetti or giant tongues from a collection
of books over time. And if I get stuck on an idea, I'll
sit there and flick through and look at those images
and it will get me out of a rut. (AD1)

In this instance, cultural symbols are inflected with
the participant's own decision-making processes rather
than those presented immediately by Google. This
description of practice reflects Burtenshaw, Mahon, and
Barfoot’s (2011) observation that “[c]reative teams have
often been compared to magpies, continually collecting
ideas, pictures, cuttings from magazines and anything
else that they feel is worth storing away, providing cre-
ative inspiration that can then be drawn upon at a later
date” (p. 91). Interestingly, these descriptions refer to
analog modes of information gathering and storage that
emerge as anomalies in the digital media era. The major-
ity of creative practitioners may still be “magpies”; how-
ever, their access to sources of inspiration are more likely
to revolve around digital media platforms and search
engines that enable instantaneous discovery or recall.

Other participants said search engine use narrowed
their experience by connecting them to ideas that
already exist rather than novel forms of inspiration.
The following reflections illustrate this perspective:

I wouldn’t take keywords from the brief and put
them into Google... . ’'m careful; I don’t want to be
derivative, because the Internet is full of stuff that
already exists. (AD6)

[When using Google search] you're out there looking
for someone else’s idea or looking for an idea that
you can co-opt, as opposed to analyzing what the
actual solution should be within your own mind. To
me, it’s not about approaching it logically; it’s about a
random process. (AD1)

Another participant described a specific detrimental
effect of search engine use in the creative process:

If [m doing research [using Google] and someone
from a competitor brand is doing the same thing,
potentially we could get our ideas from the same
source. (CW6)

These observations collectively reveal a desire to
develop original ideas and the belief that search
engine use may prioritize cultural representations that
are widely known or likely to also be used by other
creative teams when producing advertisements.

The limitation of access to qualitatively diverse
media content was observed as another detrimental
effect of Google search use. As one interviewee noted:

It sort of feels like it’s trying to keep me in a bubble
of what it thinks I want, and that’s not very
applicable in the creative industries. (AD8)

Another art director described the feeling of being
taken on a predetermined pathway:

[Google] can remove your own training from the
process of coming up with an idea. You can actually
end up going down an incorrect pathway purely
based on the style or inappropriate style; it might be
something that you are attracted to, but it might not
be appropriate. (AD5)

These statements echo the concerns raised by
Pariser (2011) and Vaidhyanathan (2011) about the
influence of search engines with personalization capa-
bilities on knowledge building. They point to a tacit
understanding that Google use imposes perimeters
around tasks undertaken within an area of practice
that has been described as prospering when “rules”
are not followed (Nyilasy and Reid 2009).

Other participants noted that while the use of
search engines may have some detrimental effects, the
engine’s benefits ultimately outweigh its
limitations:

search

[Google is] just such a great source of inspiration... .
Rather than going to the library, you can just read
[online]. I know [the information Google provides] is
limited, but no, I don’t think [it limits my
creativity]. (CW4)

In this instance, a detrimental effect is noted; how-
ever, this limitation is seen as an acceptable trade-off
in return for convenient access to information.

In summary, participants who expressed negative
perceptions of the search engine said it limited their
ability to focus on a creative project, exposed them to
existing rather than new ideas, and narrowed their
exposure to qualitatively diverse information. These
limitations did not stop participants from using the
search engine, as all stated that it was commonly used
during the creative process. This ambivalence could
be explained in a number of ways. It is possible that
participants felt search was just one method of draw-
ing information into the creative process and thus
yielded limited influence. Alternatively, the belief that
the benefits of Google search ultimately outweigh its
limitations—which was articulated by a small number
of participants—may be more broadly accepted.
Another possibility is that the largely obscured ways
that Google search filters information has the effect of
limiting awareness of the extent of its influence.

An Incomplete Understanding

Analysis of participant perceptions’ of how Google
structures access to information provides a means of
understanding whether they link their concerns about
the search engine’s influence to its filtering mecha-
nisms. Interestingly, participants
descriptions of how Google filters its search results.
Only two practitioners, both of whom specialized in

varied in their

JOURNAL OF INTERACTIVE ADVERTISING © 7

digital advertising, discussed both PageRank and per-
sonalization algorithms, which are generally accepted
as Google’s most influential filtering mechanisms
(Halavais 2009; Vaidhyanathan 2011; Hillis, Petit, and
Jarrett 2013). A group of participants alluded to the
concept of personalization when discussing the search
engine’s referral to previously collected data about the
user in its formation of results. As one partici-
pant stated:

From what I am able to understand, it’s able to build
a profile on a search user. (AD2)

Recognition that Google search had the capacity to
apply information drawn from the parent company’s
other platforms was the focus of another participant’s
description:

If you type in “cars” or whatever, and my girlfriend
types in cars, it could come up with different results.
I do know that they have that technology now... .
I've got a Gmail account; they might scan my subject
lines or e-mails. (CW6)

This copywriter was the only participant to reveal
an understanding that Google has the capacity to
deploy information from its other online platforms to
anticipate the user’s search queries (Google 2012).

A small number of participants linked search
engine functionality to specific creative process bar-
riers. One art director stated that there was a danger
in personalization as it “narrows” his “field of vision”
when seeking to discover novel forms of information.
Other participants said the “popularity” of Web con-
tent or “something to do with popularity” determined
search engine filtering. According to one copywriter:

The more people that click on something, the more it
affects the rank, and it goes up. So in a way, it is a
popularity thing, isn’t it, that you are going to get
something that many other people have gone
to. (CW2)

While this form of popularity may have some
impact on search engine rankings, it is of less influ-
ence than PageRank algorithm parameters that focus
on inbound links to the establish “importance” (Diaz
2008, p. 15) or “authority” (Halavais 2009, p. 18) of
online content. Participants spoke broadly about the
concept of “relevance” on a few occasions or stated
that Google predominantly matches keywords con-
tained in online content to search terms written in the
query field—the predominant filtering mechanism for
search engines prior to the development of PageRank
(Battelle 2005; Halavais 2009). Others appeared to
conflate Google’s organic searches with paid or spon-
sored listings.
8 @) R BARKER

Analysis of participant descriptions indicated that a
limited understanding of the filtering mechanisms of
digital media technology is commonly used to draw
information and inspiration into the creative process.
It is interesting to note that two participants linked
their concerns about search engine use—specifically,
its narrowing of their access to diverse sources of
information—to Google’s algorithmic filtering proc-
esses. However, it can be concluded that, for most, a
link between their concerns about search engine use
and Google’s filtering mechanisms was not read-
ily apparent.

Discussion

Advertising practitioners have acknowledged that the
online environment provides unprecedented access to
an immense repository of information that can be
used to inspire new ideas and resolve gaps in their
knowledge (Barker 2018). This ease of access to infor-
mational raw materials during the creative process
offers clear benefits. Yet, at the same time, the filters
needed to manage information abundance have
resulted in new forms of media bias being introduced
into the creative process. Rather than facilitating
access to all parts of the Web, the search results pre-
sented by Google are prioritized according to the
company’s notion of relevance. Google’s PageRank
algorithm determines relevance by placing web pages
with the most inbound links at the top of its listing of
search results. In effect, a quantitative measure of
popularity is used to preempt relevance to the
searcher. This is indeed useful to creatives when they
are consciously attempting to understand what is con-
sidered to be popular to an audience, in other words,
to understand mainstream culture. However, Google’s
bias toward the popular also serves to limit users’
exposure to unconventional or nonmainstream sour-
ces of inspiration.

Google’s personalization algorithms arguably seek
to counterbalance PageRank’s prioritization of the
most popular search results, as it tailors search results
according to data collected about the individual user’s
interests, social relationships, and location. A com-
monsense understanding of personalization would
suggest there is a relationship between the amount of
data collected by the search engine about the user and
the level of personalization inherent in search results.
However, while the search engine is in a position to
build sizable user profiles, it is not possible for Google
to establish a complete picture of a user’s intentions,
preferences, and desires that would be necessary to

develop truly individual predictions. Accordingly, per-
sonalization algorithms are confined to making an
approximation of the searcher’s intent (Hillis, Petit,
and Jarrett 2013). This contention is supported by an
empirical study of Google search personalization by
Feuz, Fuller, and Stalder (2011), which found user
information is compiled into a profile that is then
associated with particular groups: “Rather than seeing
what is of most interest to the user as an individual,
we are presented with a preselected image of the
world based on what kind of group the search engine
associates us with” (para. 60). It is this allocation of
group characteristics to individual users that allows
the search engine to fill any gaps in its knowledge of
the individual searcher when making predictions.
Hillis, Petit, and Jarrett (2013, p. 64) describe this
approximation of user intent as “generic individu-
alization,” a push-pull between the collective and the
personal that has the tendency to homogenize search
outcomes among groups of individuals who present
similar characteristics. Feuz, Fuller, and Stalder (2011)
argue that an adherence to a set of prestated preferen-
ces results in a self-fulfilling prophecy. Access to con-
tent that has been tailored to a specific group means
the user is unlikely to be exposed to information
beyond the predetermined vision established for them.
In the case of advertising creatives, this condition is
capable of contributing to an “echo chamber” effect
inherent in the industry (Barker 2018), with search
users being directed back to advertising industry-re-
lated content.

The prioritization of access to advertising indus-
try-related content is just one potential outcome of
search engine use. Siva Vaidhyanathan (2011) argues
that the delivery of results based on a profile erodes
the serendipity—the chance encounters and helpful
mistakes—that often evokes knowledge and creativity.
Writing about “algorithmic culture,” Hallinan and
Striphas (2014, p. 119) have warned of a cultural con-
formity that emerges when “the use of computation
processes to sort, classify, and hierarchize people, pla-
ces, objects, and ideas [shapes] the habits of
thought, conduct, and expression that arise in rela-
tionship to those processes.” This aspect of algorith-
mic culture conflicts with descriptions of creative
process best practice that suggest creative practitioners
maintain an interest in “everything under the sun”
(Young [1940] 2003, p. 40) and be “aware of a wide
variety of information in your environment” (Sawyer
2012, p. 96). There was some recognition among
study participants of Google search’s limitation of
access to diverse forms of information. In particular,
this emerged in discussion of the “pathway” that
Google search constructs for the user to follow, its
logical rather than “random” structuring of informa-
tion, and the platform’s propensity to place searchers
in a “bubble.” However, an apparent lack of alterna-
tives for online searching and convenient access to
information negated these concerns for most. Previous
empirical studies of advertising production highlight
practitioners’ desire to break rather than follow the
rules (Nyilasy and Reid 2009). With its adherence to a
largely obscured set of filtering rules, it can be argued
that Google search introduces nascent forms of con-
formity to research and ideation tasks, a condition
with the capacity to intensify as personalization mech-
anisms become more sophisticated.

It can be argued the search engine introduces
emergent complexities to creative process actions.
Participant descriptions indicated the search engine is
used for information-discovery and
recovery purposes; however, Google’s current preemp-
tive capabilities do not distinguish between these two
modes. Hillis, Petit, and Jarrett (2013) point out that
the application of personalization algorithms to pre-
empt the searcher’s intention lends itself to informa-
tion recovery rather than information discovery
because the search engine refers back to the user’s
previous behaviors to make predictions. But do users
know they are going “back to the future” under this
model of search, even when they are attempting to
discover rather than recover

information-

information? Pariser
(2011, p. 91) argues that search engine personalization
can result in exposure to the “adjacent unknown,”
information that feels new but is not. Rather than
broadening experience and knowledge, the adjacent
unknown keeps searchers trapped within their own
sphere of experience and precludes what could be
described as the “distant unknown.” A small number
of participants in this study revealed awareness of this
limitation in their everyday work practices by suggest-
ing that Google predominantly connected them to
“jdeas that already exist” rather than unexpected or
diverse forms of information. However, as is the case
with the other limitations of Google use in the cre-
ative process, these concerns are both seen and unseen
due to a limited awareness of search engine function-
ality. For the majority of participants in this study,
Google search functions largely as a black box that
has been habitualized into practice with limited con-
sideration of its inner workings. This is not a surpris-
ing outcome. As Kover (2016) points out, many
aspects of advertising creativity, including the contexts
in which it is produced, remain unquestioned. A less

JOURNAL OF INTERACTIVE ADVERTISING © 9

expected outcome of this study was the extent of con-
cerns raised about the search engine despite its com-
mon use in research and ideation tasks. When asked
to describe the search engine’s filtering mechanisms it
became clear that most participants had not made an
explicit link between effect (frustration that search
provides access to predictable or known information)
and its cause (algorithmic processes that prioritize the
familiar and mainstream). As such, it can be argued
that greater awareness of what sits inside the black
box of Google—even at a conceptual level—is needed
to allow creative practitioners to reflexively undertake
research, ideation, and evaluation tasks. It is in the
best interests of both advertising agencies and educa-
tors to broach the subject of digital literacy, as
opposed to assuming that the ability to use a digital
media platform equates to an awareness of its biases.
This article has argued that Google search both
assists and limits creative process actions, a finding
evinced by participants’ often ambiguous perceptions
of the role and influence of the search engine on the
creative process. The extent to which the benefits of
“search” as means of drawing information into cre-
ative process outweigh its negatives is an area for
future study. Importantly, the algorithmic gatekeeping
applied by Google search represents a tendency
toward a simultaneous expansion and contraction of
access to digital media content that is largely obscured
to the user and thus has an influence on the creative
process in ways that legacy media did not. The limita-
tions of this study include the lack of transparency
surrounding the functioning of Google search and the
evolving algorithmic processes that scholars have
identified as contributing to the filter bubble phenom-
enon. This area of inquiry would benefit by being

broadened to involve practitioners other than
Australian-based participants. Future studies that
employ quantitative and qualitative research

approaches would serve to expand the scope of this
initial investigation. It is worth noting that algorithmic
gatekeeping and personalization techniques are also
deployed in other digital media technologies, includ-
ing video-sharing and social media platforms.
Exploration of how these technologies are used to
feed information into the creative process would pro-
vide further understanding of how big ideas come to
life in the digital media era. Indeed, Google search is
just one means of drawing facts, ideas, and inspiration
into the lived experience of art directors and copy-
writers. Yet, as an information-gathering strategy that

has quietly been normalized in practice, the nature
10 @) R. BARKER

and extent of its transformative role in the production
of creative advertising should not go unquestioned.

Acknowledgments

The author would like to thank the anonymous reviewers
for their insightful feedback during the review process.

ORCID
Richie Barker @ http://orcid.org/0000-0001-5908-8973

References

Allday, A. (2014), IBIS World Industry Report M6941:
Advertising Agencies in Australia, Melbourne: IBISWorld.

Barker, R. (2018), “Creatives Talk Technology: Exploring
the Role and Influence of Digital Media in the Creative
Process of Advertising Art Directors and Copywriters,”
Media Practice and Education, doi:10.1080/
25741136.2018.1464741

Battelle, J. (2005), The Search: How Google and Its Rivals
Rewrote the Rules of Business and Transformed Our
Culture, Boston, MA: Nicholas Brealey.

Belch, G.E., M.A. Belch, G. Kerr, and I. Powell (2014),
Advertising: An Integrated Marketing Communication
Perspective, 3rd ed., Sydney, Australia: McGraw-Hill
Education.

Bengtson, T. (1982), “Creativity’s Paradoxical Character: A
Postscript to James Webb Young’s Technique for
Producing Ideas,” Journal of Advertising, 11 (1), 3-9.

Bertrand, IL, and P. Hughes (2005), Media Research
Methods: Audiences, Institutions, Texts, New York:
Palgrave Macmillan.

Bozdag, E. (2013), “Bias in Algorithmic Filtering and
Personalization,” Ethics in Information Technology, 15
(3), 209-27.

Burtenshaw, K., N. Mahon, and C. Barfoot (2011), The
Fundamentals of Creative Advertising, Lausanne,
Switzerland: AVA.

Cormen, T.C., C.E. Leiserson, R. Rivest, and C. Stein
(2009), Introduction of Algorithms, 3rd ed., Cambridge,
MA: MIT Press.

Diaz, A. (2008), “Through the Google Goggles:
Sociopolitical Bias in Search Engine Design,” in Web
Search: Multidisciplinary Perspectives, A. Spink and M.
Zimmer, eds., Berlin: Springer, 11-34.

El-Murad, J., and D.C. West (2004), “The Definition and
Measurement of Creativity: What Do We Know,”
Journal of Advertising Research, 44 (2), 188-201.

Feuz, M., M. Fuller, and F. Stalder (2011), “Personal Web
Searching in the Age of Semantic Capitalism: Diagnosing
the Mechanisms of Personalization,” First Monday, 16
(2), http://firstmonday.org/article/view/3344/2766.

Franceschet, M. (2011), “PageRank: Standing on the Shoulders
of Giants,” Communications of the ACM, 54 (6), 92-101.

Google (n.d.), “How Search Works: Algorithms,” Inside
Google Search, http://www.google.com/search/about/insi-

desearch/howsearchworks/algorithms.html.

——— (2012), “Updating Our Privacy Policies and Terms
of Service,” Google Official Blog, January 24, http://www.
googleblog.blogspot.com.au/2012/01/updating-our-priv-
acy-policies-and-terms.html.

Halavais, A. (2009), Search Engine Society, Cambridge,
United Kingdom: Polity Press.

Hallinan, B., and R. Striphas (2014), “Recommended for
You: The Netflix Prize and the Production of Algorithmic
Culture,” New Media and Society, 18 (1), 117-37.

Hennink, M., I. Hutter, and A. Bailey (2011), Qualitative
Research Methods, London: Sage.

Hillis, K., M. Petit, and K. Jarrett (2013), Google and the
Culture of Search, New York, NY: Routledge.

Information Geographies (2014), “Age of Internet Empires,”
http://geography.oii.ox.ac.uk/?page=age-of-internet-empires.

Kover, AJ. (2016), “Advertising Creativity: Some
Open Questions,” Journal of Advertising Research, 56 (3),
235-37.

Lubart, T. (2001), “Models of Creative Process: Past,
Present, and Future,” Creativity Research Journal, 13 (A),
295-308.

Miles, M.B., and M.A. Huberman (1994), Qualitative Data
Analysis: An Expanded Sourcebook, Thousand Oaks, CA:
Sage.

Nixon, S. (2003), Advertising Cultures: Gender, Commerce,
Creativity, London: Sage.

Nyilasy, G., and L.N. Reid (2009), “Agency Practitioners’
Meta-Theories of Advertising,” International Journal of
Advertising, 28 (4), 639-68.

———, R. Canniford, and PJ. Kreshel (2013), “Ad Agency
Professionals’ Mental Models of Advertising Creativity,”
European Journal of Marketing, 47 (10), 1691-1710.

Pariser, E. (2011), The Filter Bubble: What the Internet Is
Hiding from You, New York, NY: Penguin Press.

Sawyer, R. (2012), Explaining Creativity: The Science of
Human Innovation, 2nd ed., New York, NY: Oxford
University Press.

Stuhlfaut, M.W. (2011), “The Creative Code: An
Organizational Influence on the Creative Process in
Advertising,” International Journal of Advertising, 30 (2),
283-304.

Trainor AA, and E. Graue (2013), Reviewing
Qualitative Research in the Social Sciences, New York,
NY: Routledge.

Vaidhyanathan, S. (2011), The Googlization of Everything
(And Why We Should Worry), Berkeley: University of
California Press.

Vanden Bergh, B., and M. Stuhlfaut (2006), “Is Advertising
Creativity Primarily an Individual or Social Process?,”
Mass Communication and Society, 9 (4), 373-97.

Wagler, A. (2013), “Embracing Change: Exploring How
Creative Professionals Use Interactive Media in
Advertising Campaigns,” Journal of Interactive
Advertising, 13 (2), 118-27.

Wood, L.A. and R.O. Kroger (2000), Doing Discourse
Analysis: Methods for Studying Action in Talk and Text,
Thousand Oaks, CA: Sage.

Young, J.W. ([1940] 2003), A Technique for Producing
Ideas, New York, NY: McGraw-Hill Professional.
Appendix 1. Semistructured
Interview Schedule

1.

Which search engines, if any, are used in your cre-
ative process?

Describe how search engines are used in your cre-
ative process.

At what points in the creative process are search
engines used?

Do search engines benefit your creative process? If
so, how?

Do search engines limit your creative process in any
way? If so, how?

How does the search engine you use the most filter its
search results?

JOURNAL OF INTERACTIVE ADVERTISING © 11

Appendix 2. Overview of Participants

 

 

 

Agency —_ Experience

Alias Age Gender size (Staff no.) (Years) Position(s) Location(s)

AD1 35-44 M 50-99 13 Digital MEL
art director

AD2 35-44 M 1-19 17 Digital MEL
art director

AD3 18-24 F N/A 4 Midweight MEL
art director

AD4 35-44 M 1-19 17 Senior BNE
art director

AD5 35-44 M 1-19 15 Creative and MEL
art director

AD6 35-44 M 50-99 13 Senior SYD
art director

AD7 45-54 F 100+ 26 Senior MEL
art director

AD8 35-44 M 1-19 27 Senior MEL
art director

AD9 35-44 M 50-99 9 Senior SYD
art director

AD10 35-44 F N/A 15 Senior MEL/SYD
art director

AD11 35-44 M 50-99 15 Digital BNE
art director

AD12 35-44 M 50-99 21 Senior BNE
art director

CW1 25-34 M N/A 9 Senior copywriter MEL/SYD

CW2 25-34 M 50-99 5 Midweight SYD
copywriter

CW3 45-54 M 1-19 30 Creative BNE
and
copywriter

CW4 35-44 ~F 20-49 12 Senior copywriter = MEL

CW5 35-44 M N/A 24 Creative BNE
and
copywriter

CW6 25-34 M 50-99 4 Midweight SYD
copywriter

Note. BNE: Brisbane; MEL: Melbourne; SYD : Sydney.
