 
IMAGE BY ECHO3005 / SHUTTERSTOCK.COM

DIALOGUES | STANDPOINT

Who Wants
to Live ina
Filter Bubble?

From ‘Zillow Surfing’ to
Data-Driven Segregation

© Yanni Alexander Loukissas, Georgia Tech

—a peak moment of Covid-induced
the New York Times published

” an increasingly common

any U.S. readers will be

et’s dominant service for
ancing residential real
ndemic, people are finding
ite. “What many are

se Zillow,” explains the
rchase, but an alternate life.”
dto my own home for the
ised that people are turning
ir living circumstances might
‘w months of the pandemic,

ngs on the site increased more than
fifty percent year over year. For many of these new users,
Zillow is simply a convenient and comforting means of
temporarily escaping the reality of the pandemic. The
article, titled “Zillow Surfing Is the Escape We All Need
Right Now,” appeared in the Style section of the Times

 
 
 
   
     
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

  
  

with Zillow,
buying, renti
nthe context
creative use

  
  
  

and was meant to be a light diversion from more serious
investigative pieces on the political and health impacts

of the pandemic. However, Zillow surfing highlights an
important phenomenon that predates Covid-19.

People have learned to use data to refresh the timeworn
dream of owning the right home in the right neighborhood.
This new version, which we might call the algorithmic
American dream goes something like this: Access to data
and algorithmic tools can help us get control of our lives
by reducing uncertainties and making our lived realities
resemble our filter bubbles.

We create filter bubbles when we use algorithms to
personalize our online experiences, by blocking any
information that doesn’t conform to our existing belief
system [2]. The term fier bubble was first used in 2010 to
characterize the way that people curate their social media
feeds online, effectively excluding perspectives they do
not care to see. The same kinds of filters also allow us to
address the uncertainties we might face in online dating
or in using an app to find a nearby restaurant. Why not use

 

Insights

> People are using data on Zillow to refresh the timeworn dream of owning the right home in the right neighborhood.
> However, in a society split along racial and class lines, finding your dream home means accepting and navigating many

structural inequalities.

=> The market that Zillow aims to optimize is a system by which society segregates itself to preserve social hierarchies.

INTERACTIONS.ACM.ORG

MAY-JUNE 2022 INTERACTIONS 37
DIALOGUES | STANDPOINT

data to seek out a new and more fulfilling home life, if only
as a fantasy?

Without the need for a real estate agent, who can only
show a couple of listings at a time, visitors to Zillow can
filter properties by the home features they care about. As
with the news, home searches can be made to conform
to almost any preexisting belief system. Unfortunately,
this way of using data ensures that we do not see the
implications of what we filter out. Rashida Richardson’s
illuminating and cautionary article, “Racial Segregation
and the Data-Driven Society: How Our Failure to Reckon
with Root Causes Perpetuates Separate and Unequal
Realities” [3], highlighted in this issue
of Interactions, suggests one particular
concern that might be painful for some
to see: How does the history of racial
segregation shape the way users of Zillow
identify their ideal homes?

In my 2019 book, Ail Data Are Local:
Thinking Critically in a Data-Driven
Society, | write about Zillow as a data
setting, a context in which property values
are meant to be operationally rather
than truly understood [4]. Data settings
define what we can do with data and what
claims about the world we can use them
to support. I explain Zillow as part of the
“interface economy” [5], a rapidly growing
area of business in which companies
aggregate data from various sources and
provide access as well as interpretive
tools. Some of these companies charge
a fee. Others use the popularity of their
services to draw advertising revenue.
Zillow offers a combination of visual,
discursive, and algorithmic tools to make
sense of data from county records, multiple
listing services, and even homeowners
themselves. It is best known for generating
daily estimates of the current value of
nearly every home in the U.S.

The widespread fascination with Zillow is not just about
appreciating beautiful homes, which is something that I
can relate to as a former architect. Rather, the company
encourages visitors to think of real estate data as a vehicle
for personal fulfillment. “We can help you move forward,”
reads the messaging on its website. Visitors to Zillow are

responding to this sentiment en masse. “There’s something

therapeutic about searching houses and starting to make
plans for something with a positive outcome,” explains one

Zillow user. “It makes me think there is a light at the end of

the tunnel, and someday I’ll be at my dream house” [1].
Completing this dream image takes more than data on
property values. Zillow offers access to data on other issues
of interest to potential homebuyers, such as neighborhood
school performance and crime rates. “It’s easier to picture
your future when you have access to the floor plan of the
space or know which school your children would attend if
you lived there,” says one Zillow user [1]. This is where the
true stakes of Zillow become clearer. The understanding
that where you live determines the opportunities available
to your children underlies the very notion of segregation.

38 INTERACTIONS MAY-JUNE 2022

opportunities
available to
your children .

very notion of

5 tg 8
determines the og
.e?
. Epedd
e -3°82%38?
underlies the + @- cee @eece
oge8eias
segregation. 8. Teseak
TSE 8s
. -@0«e .
ott Hi
e e@ -. ee
- @ @-e
oe ©

In a society split along racial and class lines, finding
your dream home means accepting and navigating these
structural inequalities.

As Richardson explains, your zip code is a social marker
that can be used to discriminate against you. For example,
in the 1930s the Home Owners’ Loan Corporation created
“redlining maps” to claim that there were differential
risks of investing in segregated neighborhoods throughout
the U.S. Using these maps, federal agencies and private
banks alike directed disproportionate financial support
to homeowners in predominantly white neighborhoods.
Today, the racist effects of redlining can still be felt in cities

The under-
standing that
where you live

across the country. Could Zillow have similar cumulative
effects, by empowering its users to enact their own beliefs
about financial risk through algorithmic filters?

Let me unpack some relevant considerations about
how Zillow works as a data setting. The visual interface
for the site is a parking-lot-gray map. It is laced with
thin white roads and spotted with patches of green and
blue to indicate natural areas. Small red dots on the map
indicate data points, which are properties available for
sale or rent. Underneath each dot is a single value: 425K,
587K, 245K. Zoom in further, and the map subdivides
into parcels. Clicking on one brings up more information:
an address, the number of bedrooms and bathrooms,
the square footage. More-sumptuous details also reveal
themselves in this interaction. Artful photographs show off
the property, inside and out. Evocative descriptions evoke
interior details (“hardwood flooring”) and surface materials
(“granite countertops”), as well as nearby amenities (“local
restaurants and coffee shops”).

This context for data exploration is complimented by
a discursive framework built around the metaphor of a

@INTERACTIONSMAG

000+ -0@e@O-OO800 -O80- - 0.

- + ©@O-@000eSOSSOCCe cGo-00
OSSD» DOGS PSSST Se* °°
© + + COCHSOHSOONHSDe - 0D- OHeHe>: - -

IMAGE BY BEST VECTOR / SHUTTERSTOCK.COM

-@ ©00888e -G00GD-O80-Oe -G0- °

personal journey. “We can help you find your way home,”
promises the site. Finally, the entire setting is brought to
life by its underlying algorithms. Whether or not they are
on the market, each parcel mapped on Zillow comes with
a Zestimate: an estimated property value, generated anew
each day by the company’s proprietary valuation model.
According to Zillow, these values are within 4.5 percent of
the final sale price of properties fifty percent of the time.
Real estate agents are often dismissive of Zestimates. But
they can be extremely alluring to buyers and sellers alike.
Even if users know that Zillow’s numbers are not entirely
reliable, Zestimates give them a handhold in an otherwise

 

Hie

uncertain and rapidly changing marketplace. What’s more,
they are free. But there are unseen costs to using Zillow
that fall disproportionately on nonusers, particularly those
in low-income communities.

In 2019, I wrote about my own experience learning
about Zillow as a first-time homebuyer in Atlanta, Georgia:

I found that Zillow supported certain kinds of desires:
the right neighborhood, the right price, the right school zone,
and the expectation of a stable investment, or even a profit.
But it did not support other things my partner and I cared
about. We were wary of contributing to Atlanta’s latest wave
of gentrification. There are few policies in Georgia to protect
low-income homeowners and renters from the increasing
costs of staying in their own neighborhoods. In fact, we were
ambivalent about becoming homeowners at all, ifit meant
participating in an inherently unjust system [6].

Eventually, I did buy a home. It was a challenge to find
a neighborhood in Atlanta that was not either segregated
or actively gentrifying. During the civil rights movement,
Atlanta became a center for Black cultural life. More
recently, middle-class white newcomers, like myself, have

INTERACTIONS.ACM.ORG

either chosen to live apart from long-term Black residents
or displaced those who have not had the means to compete
in the market. Tragically, gentrification is fundamentally
altering some of Atlanta’s most historically significant
Black neighborhoods, such as the Old Fourth Ward, where
Martin Luther King Jr. once lived and is still memorialized
today. On Zillow, the neighborhood is represented as no
more than a collection of listings for sale. The photos reveal
dreamy interiors (remodeled to sell) and their Zestimates
are on the rise. The interface economy seems to take all
data at face value, without regard for local or contested
meanings. In Zillow, more rights are afforded to data than
the people or places that they rather crudely represent.

If researchers who contribute to human-computer
interaction are to understand the dynamics that Robinson
has described, and formulate just responses, we need
to raise our own critical consciousness. Looking for an
indication of how the field is doing in this regard, Irana
search on “race + segregation” in the digital archives of this
publication, Zvteractions. 1 also searched the proceedings
of three conferences connected with the Association
of Computer Machinery (ACM): Computer-Supported
Cooperative Work (CSCW), Computer-Human Interaction
(CHI), and Designing Interactive Systems (DIS). The past
10 years show a steady increase in the number of articles
that mention both terms, which is promising. But 10 years
before that, my search returned few or no results.

The study of racial segregation in HCI deserves to
be more than a niche topic for a few “social justice”
researchers. This cannot happen without the support of
the institutions of higher education that host HCI research
programs. At the same time, each of us must confront the
implications for our own research. Robinson identifies
two primary conditions that might be holding individual
researchers back from doing so: 1) a lack of understanding
about the local histories of segregation and 2) a fear of
revealing their own complicity, since most HCI researchers
are white and middle class.

This analysis rings true. It also indicates several
opportunities to pivot. There are things that HCI
researchers can do to raise their own awareness and that of
the field overall. They can work to increase the diversity of
HCI programs by making those programs more accessible
and relevant for BIPOC young people. They can challenge
oppressive legislation targeting “critical race theory,”
which threatens to keep public universities from teaching
the truth about race. Through cross-listed courses and
collaborative grants, they can learn from and support
researchers who study the effects of racial segregation in
Black media studies, American studies, urban sociology,
and cultural geography.

From my own research, I can offer HCI researchers
a few tools for reconnecting data to local histories. I
agree with Robinson that racial segregation can only be
understood locally, in relation to specific spatial, cultural,
and policy conditions. Unfortunately, some researchers
in HCI misinterpret local as meaning small scale. They
fear that a local perspective will limit the application of
their technologies or result in a statistically insignificant
study. I contend that /oca/is not a particular scale. Rather,
it is a relative designation that is dependent on context.
For a nuclear physicist, the local is subatomic. For an

MAY-JUNE 2022 INTERACTIONS 39
DIALOGUES | STANDPOINT

astrophysicist, it is the solar system. In HCI, a local
perspective is one that acknowledges the seams inherent

in computing systems. When HCI researchers dismiss

the local, they are assuming that it doesn’t matter where,
when, or who we are. We are all just users. This is the “myth
of digital universalism,” writes Anita Chan [7]. Thinking
locally can be a form of critical thinking. It is an antidote

to digital universalism, which can help us see the human
consequences of our filter bubbles.

Richardson’s article offers us three important questions
for assessing data-driven systems, such as Zillow, from
a local perspective. These questions have the power to
reveal the underlying connections of data
and algorithms to racial segregation:

1) What problem is being solved by the
system? 2) What data is being used to
train the system? 3) How is the system
being evaluated? The creators of these
systems usually have ready answers to
these questions. But they are rarely local
answers, and often overlook important
implications. Zillow provides a useful
object lesson in this regard. Let’s consider
each of Richardson’s questions in
relationship to Zillow.

What problem is being solved by Zillow?
According to its own messaging, Zillow
aspires to help visitors address a personal
question: “How can I find my way home?”
Judging by the overwhelming popularity
of the site, this question resonates broadly.
Users of Zillow may not feel at home in
their current life circumstances. These
feelings may have been exacerbated by
the pandemic, which has forced us to
meet many more of our needs at home.
Our homes have become our primary
workplaces, our schools, and often our only
places for respite. It is understandable that
people need things their current homes
are unable to provide. However, buying or
selling a home in a market economy has implications that
go beyond personal fulfillment. As I explained above, the
sale value of a house feeds back into Zillow as a new data
point, with effects on how comparable houses are valued.
Depending on the local policy environment, this can lead
to increases in rent or property taxes for nearby residents,
as well as the overall affordability of a neighborhood. In
Atlanta, there are few protections from displacement
afforded to low-income residents, most of whom are Black.
In this way, finding your dream home can cause others
to lose theirs. In a society where wealth is inequitably
distributed by race and class, the cumulative effect is
segregation.

How are Zillow’s algorithms being trained? Zillow’s
algorithms make use of publicly available data to follow
the housing market, with the intention of increasing
transparency and helping people understand the rapidly
changing dynamics of real estate:

Our mission is to empower consumers with information
and tools to make smart decisions about homes, real estate, and
mortgages. For this reason, we do not remove public record

40 INTERACTIONS MAY-JUNE 2022

segregates
itself to pre-

hierarchies,
such as class
and race. :

property data from Zillow unless it is shown to be erroneous |8\.
The idea of using public data to help people can seem
benevolent. After all, this data is created for the public
good. Unfortunately, I have found that public data, such
as that which is created for tax assessment purposes, can
vary widely in its formulation and accuracy [4]. Zillow uses
this data because it is better than nothing. Moreover, the
company can blame public entitles for any errors, while also
putting the responsibility for finding them onto users of
the site. Visitors to Zillow may see and correct errors about
their own properties, but are unlikely to know about more
systemic errors, particularly in data from other places.

The entire real
estate market
that Zillow aims
to optimize is

a system by

. e
@
e 0 @
ee @ .
- @ @ « @
which society °@; $s
| soeeee
serve social . The:
_ @ e@e @e@
e ee @ @-
soe 33838
ge: 5838:
e e@6.Uw°@ e
7. 5686
se: e@e0
os dt 8ey
pt e:8

Instead, visitors are likely to accept that Zestimates are
good enough, and check back regularly to see how their
homes, dream or real, are faring. I do this myself, usually
with an underlying feeling of anxiety. In this way, Zillow
is training not only its algorithms but its visitors as well.
Repeat visits to Zillow may be good for the company, but
this constant checking in encourages visitors to think about
property in terms of fear and financial risk, sentiments that
motivated the original redlining maps.

How is Zillow evaluated? Like many companies that
operate online, Zillow got its start with an advertising
model of revenue. It has long connected users of the site
to lenders, real estate agents, inspectors, photographers,
designers, contractors, and property managers. These are
the original customers of Zillow, and they pay significant
fees to be represented on the site. Zillow benefits less
from the veracity of its Zestimates than their allure for
visitors. More recently, Zillow has begun competing for
other kinds of work. It is now a lender, a real estate agent,
and a property manager. These roles expand its sources
of potential revenue without changing the conditions on

@INTERACTIONSMAG

eeec@e-ofeceees) O0-
eo ePeQHeHeHeeHe eH-c @.

IMAGE BY BEST VECTOR / SHUTTERSTOCK.COM

which its data and algorithms are evaluated. Data makes
Zillow a destination, but the company does not seem to
rely on data or algorithms to make money. It is not clear
that Zillow holds itself accountable for the quality of its
Zestimates or the social implications of generating them on
a frenetic daily basis.

I was encouraged to find that Robinson’s three questions
for data-driven systems connect well to the visual,
discursive, and algorithmic framework I have developed
for analyzing data settings. Data settings establish what
claims can be made visible through data (the problem),
what counts as data (the training), and what makes for

i

- ©0@NSe -Heece()- eceee-
eeceee - C0HCHHHH- COeeHhece
© G0G0 - CoHSeHH/eeeeHhecece>

CoeSSodeONOoSceHeeee-e--

CODD) NOS ea)OeeSecOee---- 00
COO - OPOOCOHOS /0o@))OGee eOs eee

GeQeeces 8000 990 -eeecce

0000) eOO - OND -HOCOHHOGC>- 0.

Ge - cele ec eOOO: eGel)S-ce
SeceQHe eHeHoeePecee--e-0
@

©@- -GeeeQgggeec -Heeceee-
ceecePeceeceNgnve-

an acceptable claim (the evaluation). It is important to
remember that data settings can be shaped by a variety of
interpretive motivations. For example, a data setting might
alternatively address the problem of racial segregation,
integrate the accounts of those who are most affected,
and be evaluated in terms of its ability to raise awareness.
Such a setting would not simply establish a more equitable
means of shopping for a home. It would reveal the
inequitable nature of all property valuation and inspire
HCI researchers to help people imagine alternative forms
of cooperative inhabitation.

Jean Baudrillard once quipped, “Disneyland is there
to conceal the fact that it is the ‘real’ country, all of ‘real’
America, which is Disneyland” [9]. He means that we
see Disneyland as a distinctive place for fantasy and for
being childlike. We imagine that Disney is distinct from
the outside world, which is run by serious adults. This
distracts us from the reality that most of our own behavior
is childish, and that no one is a complete adult. Zillow

surfing accomplishes something similar. We tell ourselves
it is merely an escape. Who doesn’t want the fantasy of

a dream home? Meanwhile, we ignore the obvious: The
entire real estate market that Zillow aims to optimize is a
system by which society segregates itself to preserve social
hierarchies, such as class and race. Who in our society is
actually entitled to their dreams?

What I have described as a new algorithmic American
dream, in which we can use data-driven decision making
to reduce the uncertainty in our lives without considering
the impacts on others. It has found one of its most insidious
manifestations in real estate. Zillow surfing is merely a
heightened manifestation of this dream, absurd enough to
be entertaining and appropriately distracting for weekend
readers of the New York Times.

We do not need to give up on data— provided it is used
responsibly and locally—as a means of sharing what we
know about the places we live. In All Data Are Local, 1
suggest approaching unfamiliar data as a starting point,

a source of questions, and an opportunity to get closer

to the people and places beyond data. “Do not take the
availability of data,” I caution, “as permission to remain

at a distance” [4]. For those who engage in Zillow surfing,
adopting this attitude could be transformative. If we give
up the fantasy of the right house in the right neighborhood,
we can use data to awaken our curiosity about the
neighborhoods where we have never considered living and
the people we might meet there.

 

ENDNOTES

1. Lorenz, T. Zillow surfing is the escape we all need right now.
The New York Times. Nov. 19, 2020; https://www.nytimes.
com/2020/11/19/style/zillow-surfing-home-listings.html

. Pariser, E. The Filter Bubble: How the New Personalized Web Is
Changing What We Read and How We Think. Penguin Books, New
York, 2012.

. Richardson, R. Racial segregation and the data-driven society:
How our failure to reckon with root causes perpetuates separate
and unequal realities. Berkeley Technology Law Journal 36, 3
(2022); https://ssrn.com/abstract=3850317

. Loukissas, Y.A. All Data Are Local: Thinking Critically in a Data-
Driven Society. The MIT Press, Cambridge, MA, 2019.

. Finn, E. What Algorithms Want: Imagination in the Age of

Computing. The MIT Press, Cambridge, MA, 2018.

Loukissas, Y.A. Let’s change the way big data present the places

we live. Big Data & Society: Essays and Provocations. Aug. 15, 2019;

https://bigdatasoc.blogspot.com/p/essays-and-provocations.

html

. Chan, A.S. Networking Peripheries: Technological Futures and the
Myth of Digital Universalism. The MIT Press, Cambridge, MA,
2016.

. How doI remove my home from Zillow? Zillow Help Center;
https://zillow.zendesk.com/hc/en-us/articles/360058140754-
How-do-I-remove-my-home-from-Zillow-

. Baudrillard, J. Selected Writings. Stanford Univ. Press, Stanford,
2001.

6.

 

© Yanni Alexander Loukissas is an associate professor of digital
media in the School of Literature, Media, and Communication at
Georgia Tech. His current research interests include participatory
mapping, critical visualization, data studies, and smart cities. He

is the author of two books, All Data Are Local: Thinking Critically in a
Data-Driven Society (The MIT Press, 2019] and Co-Designers: Cultures of
Computer Simulation in Architecture (Routledge, 2012).

+> yanni.loukissas{@lmc.gatech.edu

 

DOI: 10.1145/3529958 COPYRIGHT HELD BY OWNER/AUTHOR

INTERACTIONS.ACM.ORG

MAY-JUNE 2022 INTERACTIONS 41
