Computers in Human Behavior 97 (2019) 271–279 
Contents lists available at ScienceDirect     
Computers in Human Behavior 
journal homepage: www.elsevier.com/locate/comphumbeh 
Full length article 
Active Facebook use and mood: When digital interaction turns maladaptive T
Natalia Macrynikolaa,∗, Regina Mirandab 
a The Graduate Center, City University of New York, United States 
b Hunter College and The Graduate Center, City University of New York, United States 
ARTICLE INFO 
Keywords: 
Active Facebook use Digital interaction 
Mood 
Interpretation bias 
Rumination 
Thwarted belongingness 1. Introduction 
ABSTRACT 
Despite the prevalence of Facebook use, its psychological impact remains unclear. Recent evidence suggests that active Facebook use (i.e., peer interaction) is more adaptive than passive use (i.e., browsing content), predicting increases in affective well-being and social connectedness. However, how individual differences in cognition and belonging may influence these relationships has been largely unexamined, limiting conclusions on whether these findings extend to vulnerable individuals. The present study sought to address this gap by investigating whether active Facebook use loses its benefits in the presence of social-cognitive vulnerabilities (i.e., rumination, in terpretation bias, thwarted belongingness) that may be especially relevant to the digital context. Although active Facebook use was associated with feeling better after Facebook use and with perceiving more positive Facebook interactions, cognitive biases and thwarted belongingness predicted feeling worse after active Facebook use and reporting less positive interactions. Additionally, interpretation bias and thwarted belongingness together pre dicted feeling worse after one style of active Facebook use, through perceptions of less positive interactions. These findings suggest that beyond how one uses Facebook, the individual factors one brings to the Facebook experience may influence perceptions of interpersonal experiences in the digital space and contribute to low mood, rendering even active Facebook use maladaptive. 
1.1. Facebook use & well-being 
Technological advances have given rise to digital platforms, such as Facebook, that facilitate social connection. While the benefits of social relationships for physical and emotional health have been well-estab lished (Thoits, 2011), it remains unclear how the digital social context influences mood and mental health. Most studies on the consequences of Facebook use have examined overall (e.g., Jelenchick, Eickhoff, & Moreno, 2013), rather than specific types of, Facebook use and ignored individual differences that may influence Facebook's effect on mental health. Taking into account factors related to the digital context and to individual perceptions of what happens online, however, may help il luminate the conditions under which Facebook becomes adaptive or maladaptive, as well as who may be most susceptible to its effects. The present study sought to address these gaps by examining how different styles of Facebook use are related to mood and perceptions of digital interactions, and how individual differences in cognition and belonging that become relevant in the digital context may influence these re lationships. 
In the United States, approximately 7 in 10 adults (and 8 in 10 young adults) are Facebook users (Pew Research Center, 2018). Given that social connectedness is a fundamental human need linked with well-being (Baumeister & Leary, 1995), it is reasonable to expect that the ease and immediacy of connection that Facebook enables might be a boon for mental health. 
However, research findings on this question have been mixed. Cross-sectional studies have found an association between time spent on social networking online and negative mental health outcomes, such as depressive symptoms (Selfhout et al., 2009; Morrison & Gore, 2010; Pantic et al., 2012). Longitudinal and experimental studies have yielded similar findings: Facebook led to decreases in well-being both in a two week experience sampling study (Kross et al., 2013) and over a period of two years, compared to engagement in offline social networks (Shakya & Christakis, 2017). Yet other studies have found no evidence that Facebook use is associated with depressive symptoms (Jelenchick et al., 2013; Davila et al., 2012), and other research has linked Face book use with socioemotional benefits, including perceived social support (Lee, Kim, & Ahn, 2014; Nabi & Prestin, 2013; Valenzuela, Park, & Kee, 2009) and higher self-esteem (Toma & Hancock, 2013). 
∗ Corresponding author.Department of Psychology, Hunter College, 695 Park Ave., Room 611HN, New York, NY 10065, United States. E-mail address: nmacrynikola@gradcenter.cuny.edu (N. Macrynikola). 
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.chb.2019.02.012 
Received 17 July 2018; Received in revised form 9 February 2019; Accepted 12 February 2019 
Available online 12 February 2019 
0747-5632/ © 2019 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved. 
N. Macrynikola and R. Miranda Computers in Human Behavior 97 (2019) 271–279 
One methodological issue that may have contributed to these mixed findings is that Facebook use has often been studied in broad terms (e.g., total amount, overall use), with less of a focus on the specific factors related to the digital context that may influence the outcomes of Facebook use. Yet when these factors are taken into account, a clearer picture of when social media sites like Facebook are adaptive or ma ladaptive emerges. For example, recent evidence suggests that one factor that can differentially impact Facebook use outcomes pertains to the way Facebook is used, with two styles of Facebook use having been identified: active use (i.e., involving interaction, such as exchanging messages with friends in a private or public setting on Facebook) and passive use (i.e., consuming content without interacting, such as viewing friends' updates, profiles, or photos without leaving comments) (Verduyn et al., 2015). Research suggests that when Facebook is used to actively connect with others, it has better socioemotional outcomes than when it is used to passively consume content without interacting (Verduyn et al., 2015). Active use has been associated with decreased loneliness (Burke, Marlow, & Lento, 2010; Ryan & Xenos, 2011) and found to predict increases in affective well-being (Frison & Eggermont, 2015). In contrast, passive use has been associated with increased loneliness in cross-sectional studies (Burke et al., 2010; Ryan & Xenos, 2011) and decreased affective well-being in experimental and long itudinal studies (Frison & Eggermont, 2015; Verduyn et al., 2015; Wenninger, Krasnova, & Buxmann, 2014). One explanation for these findings may be that passive use promotes envy (Krasnova, Wenninger, Widjaja, & Buxmann, 2015), whereas active use increases perceptions of connectedness (Burke & Kraut, 2014). In a weeklong experimental study, for example, participants who increased their posting of Face book status updates reported significant increases in social connected ness at the end of the study compared to controls (Deters & Mehl, 2013). Taken together, these findings suggest that Facebook's impact on well-being partly depends on how Facebook is used and that using Fa cebook for the purpose of active interaction can increase feelings of connectedness and benefit mood. We thus predicted that, in contrast to passive use, active use would be associated with perceptions of more positive interactions and a tendency to feel better, not worse, after Facebook use (Hypothesis 1). 
1.2. Individual differences & active Facebook use 
If active Facebook use promotes socioemotional well-being, could Facebook then be a valuable and accessible tool for improving the mental health of vulnerable individuals, given the social and emotional impairments that characterize many types of psychopathology (Joiner, Lewinsohn, & Seeley, 2002; Mennin, McLaughlin, & Flanagan, 2009)? This question remains unanswered, partly because an individual dif ferences approach has often not been taken when it comes to Facebook research – a methodological issue that may have also contributed to the aforementioned mixed findings regarding Facebook use and its psy chological outcomes. Yet investigating whether the mental health benefits of active Facebook use extend to those at increased risk for psychopathology can be potentially informative about who may be more at risk for the harmful effects of Facebook use and why Facebook use may turn harmful when it does. It may be that beyond how people use Facebook, what they bring to Facebook may also play an important role in whether Facebook use becomes adaptive or maladaptive. We propose that certain cognitive and social factors may be particularly relevant to the digital social context and may render active Facebook use maladaptive, even when Facebook is used actively. Taking these social-cognitive factors into account can help shed light on when Fa cebook use becomes maladaptive and for whom. 
1.2.1. Cognitive factors 
Little research has focused on cognitive factors that may moderate the socioemotional outcomes of specific Facebook uses. Yet cognitive processing styles may play important roles during active Facebook use. 
272
Face-to-face communication is replete with affective cues that help convey intent, such as gestures (Van Heijnsbergen, Meeren, Grezes, & de Gelder, 2007) and facial expressions (Haxby, Hoffman, & Gobbini, 2002). The absence of these nonverbal cues in digital interaction may lead to a multitude of ambiguous interpersonal contexts (e.g., phrases that are neutral in tone, pauses in conversation, unanswered messages). Resolving this ambiguity in the digital context may demand a greater reliance on individual information processing tendencies, given the lack of nonverbal cues, than does face-to-face interaction. 
For vulnerable individuals, two information-processing biases that are associated with psychopathology may be especially relevant to the process of making meaning of digital interactions: interpretation bias and rumination. A more negative interpretation bias refers to the ten dency to assign more negative (versus benign or positive) meanings to ambiguous contexts (Wisco & Nolen-Hoeksema, 2010), and it plays a role in the onset and maintenance of emotional disorders (Beck, 1967; Hertel & Mathews, 2011; Mathews & MacLeod, 2005) by making ne gative mental content easily accessible and thus increasing negative affect (Hertel, Mor, Ferrari, Hunt, & Agrawal, 2014). Rumination is defined as passive, perseverative thinking about one's mood and its associated causes and consequences (Nolen-Hoeksema, 1991), and it too predicts the onset and maintenance of emotional disorders, in cluding depression (Nolen-Hoeksema, Wisco, & Lyubomirsky, 2008) and social anxiety (Brozovich & Heimberg, 2011; Vassilopoulos & Watkins, 2009). Research suggests that rumination is maladaptive in that it exacerbates pessimistic thinking and low mood (Nolen Hoeksema et al., 2008). Moreover, a more negative interpretation bias and rumination may co-occur: Dysphoric ruminators have a tendency to complete negative word fragments faster than benign ones (Hertel et al., 2014). These findings suggest that people who may tend to ex plain ambiguous Facebook interactions as more negative may also be likely to ruminate on these negative interpretations. As a result, al though active Facebook use has generally been found to promote well being (see Verduyn, Ybarra, Resibois, Jonides & Kross, 2017), in dividuals with a more negative interpretation bias and a tendency to ruminate may fail to experience increases in social connectedness and positive affect after active Facebook use. In the absence of socio emotional cues that aid an understanding of interactions, the effect of these biases may be heightened during digital interaction, reinforcing perceptions of disconnectedness and thus maintaining or exacerbating risk for psychopathology over time – a hypothesis that remains un examined. 
Little research has focused on how differences in cognitive proces sing may influence Facebook use and its outcomes. No research, to date, has examined the impact of interpretation bias on Facebook use, and only a few studies have examined the effect of rumination on Facebook use. Rumination was associated with the perception of more negative and less positive interactions on social media, including Facebook, both cross-sectionally and longitudinally (Davila et al., 2012; Feinstein et al., 2013). Rumination also moderated the relationship between perception of negative Facebook interactions and depressive symptoms (Davila et al., 2012) and mediated the relationship between negative social comparison on Facebook and depressive symptoms (Feinstein et al., 2013). However, these studies did not examine rumination in relation to specific types of Facebook use (i.e., active, passive). Only one cross sectional study of which we are aware examined rumination – in terms of its more maladaptive subtype, brooding – in relation to passive Fa cebook use and found that brooding mediated the relationship between passive use and social anxiety symptoms (Shaw, Timpano, Tran, & Joorman, 2015). How the tendency to brood specifically relates to the outcomes of active Facebook use remains unexamined. Therefore, we predicted that cognitive markers of psychopathology (i.e., interpreta tion bias and brooding) would be associated with perceptions of less positive Facebook interactions and with the tendency to feel worse, not better, after active use (Hypothesis 2). 
N. Macrynikola and R. Miranda Computers in Human Behavior 97 (2019) 271–279 
1.2.2. Social factors 
Humans have a fundamental need to belong, defined as “a drive to form and maintain at least a minimum quantity of lasting, positive, and significant interpersonal relationships” (Baumeister & Leary, 1995, p. 1). Belongingness is so essential that the thwarting of this need has been found to significantly impact mental health, increasing risk for de pression (Cacioppo, Hawkley, & Thisted, 2010) and the development of the desire to die by suicide (Van Orden et al., 2010). 
Given that Facebook is a social medium, individual differences in satisfaction of belongingness needs may play a role in whether active use confers socio-emotional benefits. Some evidence suggests that in dividuals who are unsatisfied with their social support use Facebook to compensate for their low belonging (Song et al., 2014), but less socially skilled individuals may have more difficulty connecting with others on Facebook (Seidman, 2012). Taken together, these findings suggest that individuals with unmet belonging needs may more frequently turn to Facebook to satisfy those needs but may be less successful in deriving connectedness from Facebook. 
One reason for this lower success may be that these individuals use Facebook in ways that do not promote connection (i.e., passive use); social anxiety symptoms, for example, are associated with more passive Facebook use (Shaw, Timpano, Tran, & Joormann, 2015). One possi bility that remains unexamined is that people with unmet (versus met) belonging needs are equally likely to use Facebook actively but less likely to benefit from active use. It may be that active Facebook use is not as beneficial for people with unmet belonging needs because these individuals may have greater underlying expectations of rejection. Research suggests that in ambiguous situations, people tend to base their interpretations on their underlying expectations (Liu, Kraines, Massing-Schaffer, & Alloy, 2014). Thus, if digital interaction on Face book presents many more ambiguous contexts than face-to-face inter action, then individuals with unmet belonging needs may be more likely to resolve this ambiguity by interpreting interactions in line with their underlying negative social expectations. 
One construct that fully captures unmet belonging needs is thwarted belongingness, a psychologically painful mental state that is thought to give rise to the desire for suicide (Van Orden, Cukrowicz, Witte, & Joiner, 2012). Baumeister and Leary (1995) proposed that satisfying the need to belong requires the satisfaction of two conditions: a) fre quent positive interactions with the same individuals, and b) long-term, stable relationships that provide an experience of caring. Thwarted belongingness is characterized by the lack of these two interpersonal dimensions; in other words, it consists of a) feelings of loneliness, and b) the absence of reciprocally caring relationships (Van Orden et al., 2012). 
Thwarted belongingness has rarely been studied in the digital con text. One recent cross-sectional study found that thwarted belonging ness is associated with increased negative interactions on social net working sites (Moberg & Anestis, 2015). In line with these preliminary findings and the aforementioned reasoning (i.e., that individuals scoring high on thwarted belongingness may be more likely to explain their more ambiguous digital interactions in line with their underlying negative social expectations), our third prediction was that a thwarted need to belong would be associated with perceptions of less positive Facebook interactions and a tendency to feel worse after active Face book use (Hypothesis 3). 
1.2.3. Social-cognitive interactions 
Given that risk factors for psychopathology tend to co-exist and may together influence mental health (see Hirsch, Meeten, Krahé, & Reeder, 2016; Kraemer, Stice, Kazdin, Offord, & Kupfer, 2001), it is important to examine the interactive effects of risk factors for psychopathology. Aside from their individual effects on mood after active Facebook use, social and cognitive vulnerabilities may together influence mood after active Facebook use. 
It is possible that on Facebook, unmet belonging needs and 273
interpretation bias may have a synergistic effect on mood after active use. Thwarted belongingness is thought to be a dynamic state, rather than a stable trait, that is influenced by trait-like cognitive-affective factors over time (Van Orden et al., 2010). For individuals who have a tendency to interpret neutral contexts more negatively (i.e., have a more negative interpretation bias) and are in a state of high thwarted belongingness, ambiguous interactions during active Facebook use may be especially likely to be given a negative meaning, and this meaning may be attributed to underlying negative perceptions of one's relational value and social expectations. Thus, these interpretations may influence mood because they make one's unfulfilled need to belong more salient and reinforce perceptions of not belonging. In contrast, for those who tend to interpret neutral cues more negatively but have low levels of thwarted belongingness, negative interpretations of Facebook interac tions may be less harmful for mood, since the need to belong is more fulfilled and as such, these interpretations have less significant im plications for one's belonging. Based on these hypotheses, our fourth prediction was that, among individuals higher in thwarted belonging ness, negative interpretation bias would have a greater effect on mood after active Facebook use by influencing perceptions of Facebook in teractions (Hypothesis 4). 
2. Method 
2.1. Participants 
Participants were 367 (69% female) undergraduate students, ages 18–30 (M = 19.7, SD = 2.5), from a public college in New York City, who completed an anonymous questionnaire online. The sample was racially and ethnically diverse; breakdown by race/ethnicity was 39% Asian, 24% White, 17% Hispanic/Latino/a, 11% Black, and 8% Other. The majority of participants identified as heterosexual (86%), 8% identified as bisexual, 4% as gay or lesbian, and 2% were classified as Other. Over half of the sample consisted of freshmen (53%), almost a quarter were sophomores (23%), 13% were juniors, 7% seniors, and 5% non-degree undergraduate students. 
2.2. Procedure 
Participants were recruited through an undergraduate pool of stu dents who sought to participate in research studies for psychology re search credit. The study advertisement invited students to participate in an anonymous online survey about Facebook use and other aspects of their lives. At the end of the questionnaire, a list of local counseling centers and their contact information was provided. An Institutional Review Board approved all study procedures. 
2.3. Materials 
The online questionnaire included various measures that all to gether took approximately an hour to complete. For this study, we analyzed data from measures assessing demographics, general Facebook use, cognitive biases (i.e., interpretation bias and rumina tion), thwarted belongingness, depressive symptoms, mood after Facebook use, and perceptions of Facebook interactions. 
2.3.1. Time spent on Facebook 
Number of Facebook checks per day were assessed with one ques tion: “On the average day, how frequently do you check/log onto Facebook? Please provide your best estimate.” Time spent on Facebook per check was assessed with the following question: “On average, how much time do you spend on Facebook each time you go on Facebook? Please provide your best estimate.” An additional question assessed time spent per day in the past week: “In the past week, on average, approximately how much time PER DAY have you spent actively using Facebook? Please provide your best estimate.” Participants were asked 
N. Macrynikola and R. Miranda Computers in Human Behavior 97 (2019) 271–279 
to provide these estimates in hours and minutes. To increase the like lihood that data accurately reflected participants' experiences and that the survey was taken in one sitting, we examined participants' survey completion times and excluded data from those who completed the survey too slowly or too quickly. Slow completion times were con sidered to be those that were more than 150 min – extreme values as determined by examining distributions. Fast completion times were deemed to be those that were less than a third of the time (i.e., less than 20 min) it takes to complete the hour-long survey at a reasonable pace. Before removing these participants' data, we conducted a series of t tests, which revealed group differences on key variables of interest between fast and slow completers compared to those who had reason able completion times. We thus removed data from fast and slow completers, which decreased the final sample from 502 to 367 parti cipants. 
2.3.2. Facebook use styles 
Tendency to use Facebook actively and passively was assessed with the Multidimensional Scale of Facebook Use (MSFU; Frison & Eggermont, 2015). Items on this scale are rated on a 7-point scale (from 1 = Never to 7 = Several times per day) and assess active private (2 items), active public (3 items), and passive Facebook use (2 items). Active private Facebook use involves interaction that occurs privately on Facebook (e.g., “How often do you send someone a personal message on Facebook?”). Active public Facebook use involves interaction that is visible to one's wider social network on Facebook (e.g., “How often do you update your status on your Facebook timeline?”). Passive Facebook use involves consuming Facebook content without interacting with anyone on Facebook (e.g., “How often do you visit a Facebook profile of a Facebook friend?”). In this study, we expanded the MSFU to include two additional questions assessing active public use (“How often do you post a message on someone else's wall?” and “How often do you post a picture or video on someone else's wall?”) and two additional questions to assess passive use (“How often do you view photos of a Facebook friend?” and “How often do you view photos of someone who is not part of your Facebook friend list?”). These questions were added to capture the component of active public and passive Facebook use that includes activity involving other people but still qualifies as active public and passive use. A principal components analysis of this expanded version of the MSFU revealed three distinct factors that explained 76% of the variance. Factor loadings of active private use items were 0.89–0.91, of active public use .82-.89, and of passive use .71-.89. Consistent with Frison and Eggermont (2015), one additional item (“How often do you read your Facebook newsfeed?”) that was a part of the original MSFU was removed from these analyses, because although it was expected to load highly on passive Facebook use, it did not load highly onto any of the three factors. 
2.3.3. Interpretation bias 
The Ambiguous Scenarios Test-Depression (AST-D; Berna, Lang, Goodwin, & Holmes, 2011) scale was used to measure interpretation bias. Standard and commonly used interpretation bias measures are created to measure this bias in relation to anxiety disorders (Butler & Mathews, 1983). However, given that the primary focus of this study was mood, this newer and more relevant measure of interpretation bias was used. With the AST-D, participants are shown 24 ambiguous sce narios (e.g., “You have recently taken an important exam. Your results arrive with an unexpected letter of explanation about your grade.”). Participants are instructed to form a mental image of each of the sce narios, then rate how pleasant and how vivid the image is. For this study, we adapted the instructions to ask for only one rating, a plea santness rating, given that vividness was beyond the scope of this study and we wanted to keep the survey short to increase likelihood of completion. Thus, three scenarios at a time appeared on each page of the questionnaire, along with the following directions: “Form a mental image of each of the scenarios. Imagine each scenario happening to you 
274
personally. Follow the first image that comes to mind, don't think too much about each one. Then rate how pleasant your image is.” Pleasantness rat ings were given by participants on a 9-point Likert scale (1 = Extremely unpleasant, 9 = Extremely pleasant). Thus, lower pleasantness ratings on this scale indicate a less positive/more negative interpretation bias. Item ratings were summed into a composite score, for each participant. Cronbach's alpha in this sample showed high internal consistency re liability (α = 0.87). AST-D pleasantness ratings have been found to distinguish between high and low dysphoric participants (Berna et al., 2011), and to predict future depressive symptoms in adults (Kleim, Thörn, & Ehlert, 2014). 
2.3.4. Brooding rumination 
The Ruminative Responses Scale (RRS; Nolen-Hoeksema & Morrow, 1991) was used to assess tendency to focus on one's negative mood and its associated causes and consequences. The RRS consists of 22 items, five of which assess brooding (i.e., passively dwelling on one's negative mood), and five of which measure reflection (i.e., more purposefully contemplating the reasons for one's negative mood) (Treynor, Gonzalez, & Nolen-Hoeksema, 2003). The more maladaptive form of rumination, brooding (Treynor et al., 2003) was assessed in this study (e.g., “Think ‘What am I doing to deserve this?’”). Participants rated these items on a 4-point scale (1 = Almost never, 4 = Almost always), and scores were computed by summing the items of the brooding subscale. The mean brooding score was 11.76 (SD = 3.85; range = 4–20), and the subscale showed good internal consistency reliability (α = 0.85). 
2.3.5. Thwarted belongingness 
Levels of thwarted belongingness were assessed with the Thwarted Belongingness subscale of The Interpersonal Needs Questionnaire (INQ 15; Van Orden et al., 2012). The INQ was designed to measure the extent to which individuals' belonging needs are unmet. Studies suggest that scores on this subscale correlate in the expected direction with other indices of social isolation, including loneliness and low social support (Van Orden et al., 2012). Nine items are used to measure be longingness (e.g., “I belong” and “I feel like an outsider in social gatherings”). Participants are asked to rate the accuracy of these statements in relation to themselves on a 7-point Likert scale (1 = Not at all true of me, 7 = Very true of me). Internal consistency for the thwarted belongingness items in this sample was good (α = 0.83). 
2.3.6. Depressive symptoms 
The Center for Epidemiologic Studies Depression Scale (CES-D; Radloff, 1977) was used to measure depressive symptoms, which we adjusted for in this study. The CES-D is a 20-item measure designed to identify levels of depressive symptoms in the general population. Scale items assess frequency of experiencing symptoms of depression in the past week. Responses are given on a scale of 0–3, with 0 signifying “Rarely or none of the time (less than 1 day)” and 3 “Most or all of the time (5–7 days).” Item scores are summed to form a total score, which may range from 0 (no symptoms) to 60 (severe symptoms), with a re commended cutoff point of 16. The CES-D has demonstrated concurrent and construct validity, as well as high internal consistency, with Cronbach's alpha coefficients from 0.85 to 0.90 across studies (Radloff, 1977). Cronbach's alpha in this sample showed high internal con sistency reliability (α = 0.82), and the mean CES-D score was 19.85 (SD = 11.56, range = 0–52). Depressive symptoms were included in this study as a covariate to examine the effect of predictors over and above depressive symptoms and to adjust for the potential impact of dysphoric mood on participants' ratings of their mood after Facebook use. 
2.3.7. Mood after Facebook use 
Eight questions, adapted from the Social Networking Survey (Davila et al., 2012), were included to assess how often participants tended to feel worse and better after each of the three styles of Facebook use and 
N. Macrynikola and R. Miranda Computers in Human Behavior 97 (2019) 271–279 
after scrolling through their newsfeed. Negative mood change after active private use was assessed with “After you send a personal message or chat with someone on Facebook, how often do you feel worse than 
Table 1 
Correlations of active Facebook use with subsequent mood and perceptions of Facebook interactions (N = 367). 
you did before?” and after active public Facebook use with “After you post a message, photo, or something else on your own Facebook 
Feel Better Afterward 
Feel Worse Afterward 
Pos. Interact. Neg. Interact. 
timeline, how often do you feel worse than you did before?” Negative mood change after passive Facebook use was assessed with “After you visit others' profiles or browse others' photos, how often do you feel worse than you did before?” and after newsfeed scrolling with “After you browse your newsfeed, how often do you feel worse than you did before?” To assess positive mood change after each Facebook use style, we asked each of these questions again, replacing the word “worse” with “better.” Response options on each question ranged from 1 (never) to 5 (frequently). 
2.3.8. Perception of Facebook interactions 
Two questions from the Social Networking Survey (Davila et al., 2012) were used to assess perception of overall positive or negative tone of interactions: “Thinking about all your interactions on Facebook, how positive are your interactions with people on Facebook?” and “Thinking about all your interactions on Facebook, how negative are your interactions with people on Facebook?” Response options ranged from 0 to 10 (0 = Not at all; 10 = Extremely). For the analyses, given that each user gave a separate rating for how positive and for how negative their Facebook interactions are, we calculated a ratio of po sitive to negative perceptions of interactions (after recoding the vari able to range from 1 to 11 rather than 0 to 10). Thus, if users gave positive and negative Facebook interactions the same rating, their ratio was 1. If they reported more positive than negative interactions, their ratio was higher than 1, and if they reported less positive than negative interactions, their ratio was lower than 1. This new variable was cre ated to take into account both of these ratings and thus gain a more complete picture of overall perceptions of Facebook interactions. 
3. Results and discussion 
3.1. Descriptives: General Facebook use and mood 
The mean number of Facebook checks on the average day was ap proximately 6 (M = 6.22, SD = 8.27), and the median was 4. At each check, the mean time spent on Facebook was approximately 54 min (M = 0.91, SD = 1.65), and the median was 20 min. In the past week, the mean time participants reported spending on Facebook per day was 2 h and 36 min (M = 2.63, SD = 4.54), and the median was 1 h. 
Regarding Facebook uses, on average, participants reported enga ging in active private Facebook use once a week (M = 4.18, SD = 1.94), active public use less than once a month (M = 2.01, SD = 1.05), and passive use one to three times a month (M = 3.11, SD = 1.22). Users also reported engaging in newsfeed scrolling several times a week, on average (M = 4.81, SD = 1.77). Bivariate correlations revealed that users who engaged in one style of Facebook use also tended to engage in the other styles as well: Active private use was associated with active public use, r (366) = 0.33, p < .01, with passive use, r (366) = 0.32, p < .01, and with newsfeed scrolling, r (365) = 0.36, p < .01. Active public use was associated with passive use, r (366) = 0.44, p < .01, and with newsfeed scrolling, r (365) = 0.32, p < .01. Passive use and newsfeed scrolling were also positively associated, r (365) = 0.46, p < .01. 
Twelve percent of the sample reported sometimes, frequently, or often feeling worse (and 69% better) after active private use. After active public use, 14% reported sometimes, frequently, or often feeling worse (and 61% better) afterward. After passive use, 33% reported sometimes, frequently, or often feeling worse (and 39% better) afterward. Additionally, after newsfeed scrolling, 41% reported sometimes, fre quently, or often feeling worse (and 58% better) afterward. 
275
Active private use .46∗∗ .20∗∗ .13∗ .09 Active public use .24∗∗ .09 .16∗∗ -.01 Passive use .18∗∗ .24∗∗ .02 .07 Newsfeed scrolling .31∗∗ .20∗∗ .21∗∗ -.05 
Note: Feel better Afterward and Feel Worse Afterward refer to items that as sessed mood after each style of use (e.g., 0.46 is the correlation for Active private use and “Feel Better After Active private use”; 0.24 is the correlation for Active public use and “Feel Better After Active public use”). ∗∗p < .001 ∗p < .05. 
3.2. Hypothesis 1 (H1): Facebook use, mood, and perceptions of interactions 
Toward H1, we examined tendency to feel worse and better after engaging in each style of Facebook use and whether the three styles were differentially associated with perceptions of positive or negative Facebook interactions. H1 was partially supported. As expected, in contrast to passive use, active Facebook uses were associated with perceptions of more positive interactions (see Table 1). Active uses were also associated with a tendency to feel better, with active private use, in particular, showing a moderate-to-strong association with better mood after Facebook use. Contrary to our hypothesis, however, active private use was also associated with a tendency to feel worse afterward (although its correlation with feeling better afterward was significantly larger than its correlation with feeling worse afterward, z = 4.49, p < .01), and passive use was also associated with a tendency to feel worse and better afterward. Newsfeed scrolling, which appears to be a more passive than active behavior (but did not load onto passive use, because it may be a default Facebook behavior) was also associated with both the tendency to feel worse and better afterward (see Table 1). 
These results suggest that there may be different pathways through which active and passive uses have positive and negative effects on mood. For example, active private use may lead to negative mood outcomes when quality of interaction is low. Indeed, research suggests that low perceived quality of interactions predicts increases in depres sive symptoms after Facebook use (Davila et al., 2012). Similarly, passive use may be perceived as beneficial in some cases (e.g., when it is used as a way to distract oneself from loneliness), and this perception may serve to reinforce passive Facebook use. Research suggests that feelings of disconnection may motivate Facebook use (Sheldon, Abad, & Hinsch, 2011), although whether this occurs specifically with passive use has not yet been examined. 
3.3. Hypothesis 2 (H2): Cognitive biases, mood after active use, and perceptions of interactions 
To investigate whether cognitive markers of psychopathology (i.e., interpretation bias and brooding) would be associated with perceptions of less positive Facebook interactions and a tendency to feel worse, not better, after active Facebook use, we first conducted correlational analyses examining associations between each of the two cognitive biases and a) Facebook use styles, b) Facebook interaction perceptions, and c) tendency to feel worse and better after Facebook use. We then performed three multiple linear regressions to examine whether cog nitive biases predicted tendency to feel worse after each style of Facebook use, adjusting for age, sex, race/ethnicity, time spent on Facebook, and depressive symptoms. 
Results were consistent with the predictions of H2. Interpretation bias was associated with active public Facebook use, such that the less positive participants' interpretations of ambiguous scenarios (i.e., the 
N. Macrynikola and R. Miranda Computers in Human Behavior 97 (2019) 271–279 
Table 2 
Correlations of cognitive biases and thwarted belongingness with Facebook use variables (N = 367). 
Table 3b 
Linear regression predicting tendency to feel worse after active public Facebook use. 
Thwarted 
Belonging 
Facebook use styles 
Interpretation Bias 
Brooding Rumination 
Predictor B S.E. ß p R2 
age 0.01 0.02 0.03 .52 .14∗∗ sex 0.08 0.08 0.04 .41 
Active private use -.01 -.02 -.03 Active public use .20∗∗ .02 -.03 Passive use .03 .06 -.02 Newsfeed scrolling .15∗∗ -.01 -.09 Perceptions of Facebook interactions 
Positive .25∗∗ -.15∗∗ -.22∗∗ Negative -.14∗∗ .10 -.10 Tendency to feel worse after … 
… active private use -.20∗∗ .23∗∗ .17∗∗ … active public use -.25∗∗ .27∗∗ .15∗∗ … passive use -.22∗∗ .27∗∗ .19∗∗ … newsfeed scrolling -.14∗∗ .21∗∗ .14∗∗ Tendency to feel better after … 
… active private use -.04 .03 -.08 … active public use .11∗ .05 -.07 … passive use .12∗ .08 -.06 … newsfeed scrolling .08 .09 -.05 
∗∗ p < .01, ∗ p < .05. 
lower the pleasantness ratings), the lower the reported frequency of engaging in active public Facebook use and the lower the tendency to scroll through their newsfeed; however, interpretation bias was not associated with active private or passive use (see Table 2). Interpretation bias was also associated with perceptions of positive and negative in teractions, so that the less positive the interpretations of ambiguous scenarios, the less positive the perceptions of Facebook interactions and the more negative the perceptions of Facebook interactions. Brooding was not associated with any of the Facebook use styles, but it was as sociated with less positive perceptions of interactions and more nega tive perceptions of interactions. Both interpretation bias and brooding were associated with feeling worse after all Facebook uses, and inter pretation bias was associated with feeling better after active public and passive use, such that the less positive the bias, the lower the tendency to feel better after active public use (see Table 2). 
Adjusting for age, sex, race, time spent on Facebook, and depressive symptoms, the multiple linear regressions revealed that cognitive biases were significant predictors of feeling worse after all three Facebook uses, over and above depressive symptoms. A more negative (i.e., less positive) interpretation bias predicted feeling worse after both active private and public use, and brooding predicted feeling worse after active public (but not private) use (see Table 3). 
We hypothesized that these two biases may become relevant in the Facebook context, because the lack of face-to-face socio-emotional cues may necessitate a greater reliance on one's own information processing tendencies to make sense of ambiguous digital interactions. Given that these biases were not both predictive of worse mood after engaging in active Facebook use, it may be that some features of active public use 
Table 3a 
Linear regression predicting tendency to feel worse after active private Facebook use. 
Predictor B S.E. ß p R2 
age 0.03 0.02 0.11 .05 .10∗∗ sex −0.05 0.08 −0.03 .51 
race 0.09 0.09 0.06 .31 
time on FB −0.01 0.01 −0.08 .12 
dep. symp. 0.01 0.01 0.11 .11 
interp. bias∗∗ −0.01 0.01 −0.15 .008 brood 0.03 0.01 0.12 .11 
Note. ∗∗p < .01, ∗p < .05. F(7,334) = 5.36, p < .01. 
276
race −0.14 0.10 −0.07 .17 time on FB −0.02 0.01 −0.09 .10 dep. symp. 0.01 0.01 0.09 .21 interp. bias∗∗ −0.01 0.01 −0.19 .001 
brood∗ 0.03 0.01 0.16 02 Note. ∗∗p < .01, ∗p < .05. F(7,331) = 7.39, p < .01. 
are more ambiguous and threatening for people with these biases. For example, while negative interpretations may be made in either a private setting (e.g., if one person does not respond) or a public setting (e.g., if one's status update receives few “Likes” or comments) and influence mood, perceptions of interpersonal rejection may sting more in the public setting, activating brooding, whereas active private use may at times be beneficial for brooding. These possibilities should be in vestigated in future studies. It is also noteworthy that the effect of in terpretation bias and brooding on mood held beyond depressive symptoms. Taking into account the influence of cognitive biases, in stead of just symptoms, on the outcomes of Facebook use can help extend the implications of this research to people who are not currently depressed but have elevated risk for psychopathology. 
3.4. Hypothesis 3 (H3): Thwarted belongingness, mood after active use, and perceptions of interactions 
To test whether thwarted belongingness would also be associated with the tendency to feel worse after active Facebook use and with perceptions of less positive interactions, as in the previous section, we first conducted correlational analyses followed by three multiple linear regressions examining whether thwarted belongingness predicted mood change after each style of Facebook use, adjusting for age, sex, race/ ethnicity, time spent on Facebook, and depressive symptoms. 
H3 was partially supported. While there was no association between any of the three Facebook use styles and thwarted belongingness, there was an association between thwarted belongingness and perceptions of Facebook interactions, such that the higher the thwarted belongingness, the lower the perception of positive Facebook interactions and the higher the perception of negative interactions on Facebook (see Table 3). Thwarted belongingness was also positively associated with the tendency to feel worse after active private Facebook use and after active public use, and it was also associated with feeling worse after passive use. Adjusting for age, sex, race, and time spent on Facebook, a series of multiple linear regressions revealed that thwarted belonging ness predicted feeling worse after both styles of active use, as well as after passive use. However, after adding depressive symptoms to the model, the effect of thwarted belongingness on mood after all three Facebook uses was no longer significant (see Table 4). 
These findings suggest that a state of thwarted belongingness may negatively impact perceptions of Facebook interactions, supporting the idea that individuals with unmet belonging needs may be more likely to impose their underlying negative interpersonal expectations on Facebook interactions in the absence of socio-emotional interpersonal cues that convey trust and intent during interaction, and thus experi ence mood deterioration after active Facebook use. However, given that the effect of thwarted belongingness on mood was no longer significant when levels of depressive symptoms were taken into account, depres sive symptoms may better account for variability in the tendency to feel worse after active Facebook use than does thwarted belongingness alone. 
N. Macrynikola and R. Miranda Computers in Human Behavior 97 (2019) 271–279 
Table 4a 
Linear regression predicting tendency to feel worse after active private Facebook use. 
Predictor B S.E. ß p R2 
age 0.03 0.02 0.09 .10 .08∗∗ sex −0.03 0.08 −0.02 .76 race 0.11 0.09 0.07 .22 time on FB −0.02 0.01 −0.10 .07 dep. symp.∗∗ 0.01 0.01 0.21 .001 thw. belong. 0.01 0.01 0.08 .16 
Thwarted  
belongingness 
0.02 (0.01)** 
Interpretation  
bias 
Perception of  pos. Facebook  interactions 
-0.01 (0.01) 
-0.05 (0.01)** 
Tendency to feel  worse after  
active private use 
Note. ∗∗p < .01, ∗p < .05. F(6,334) = 4.75, p < .01. 
Table 4b 
Linear regression predicting tendency to feel worse after active public Facebook use. 
Predictor B S.E. ß p R2 
age 0.01 0.02 0.01 .85 .09∗∗ sex 0.11 0.09 0.07 .22 race −0.11 0.03 −0.06 .29 time on FB∗ −0.02 0.01 −0.11 .04 dep. symp∗∗ 0.02 0.01 0.22 .001 
Fig. 1. Regardless of levels of thwarted belongingness, interpretation bias in directly affected tendency to feel worse after active private Facebook use through (lower) perceptions of positive Facebook interactions. Values shown are unstandardized coefficients, with standard errors in parentheses. Solid lines denote statistically significant paths; broken lines indicate non-significant paths. ∗∗p < .01 ∗p < .05. 
Thwarted  
belongingness 
Perception of  
pos. Facebook  
thw. belong. 0.01 0.01 0.10 .10 Note. ∗∗p < .01, ∗p < .05. F(6, 331) = 5.70, p < .01. 
-0.06 (0.02)** 
0.02 (0.01)** 
interactions 
3.5. Hypothesis 4 (H4): Social-cognitive interactions and mood after active use 
Interpretation bias 
-0.02 (0.01)** 
Tendency to feel  worse after  
active public use 
To examine the relationship between cognitive biases and thwarted belongingness, we first performed a correlational analysis with these three variables. Thwarted belongingness was associated with less po sitive (i.e., more negative) interpretation bias, r (363) = −0.40, p < .01, and with brooding, r (363) = 0.30, p < .01. A less positive (i.e., more negative) interpretation bias and brooding were also corre lated, r (363) = −0.33, p < .01. 
Then, to test whether interpretation bias and thwarted belonging ness have a synergistic effect on mood through perceptions of Facebook interactions, we performed two moderated mediation analyses using Model 8 of the PROCESS script for SPSS (Hayes, 2013). Each analysis examined the effect of interpretation bias on tendency to feel worse after either active private or active public Facebook use through per ceptions of Facebook interactions (i.e., ratio of positive to negative perceptions of Facebook interactions), and whether this relationship varied at different levels of thwarted belongingness. Indirect effects were tested using bootstrapping with 5000 resamples. Statistically significant effects were those whose 95% confidence intervals did not include zero. 
H4 was also partially supported. We expected that for individuals in a state of high (versus low) thwarted belongingness, a more negative interpretation bias would have a greater negative impact on mood after active Facebook use, and we found evidence for this hypothesis for only one style of active use. In the first moderated mediation analysis, a more negative interpretation bias (as indicated by lower pleasantness ratings) indirectly predicted the tendency to feel worse after active private Facebook use through less positive (compared to negative) overall perceptions of Facebook interactions. This indirect effect held regardless of level of thwarted belongingness, adjusting for age, sex, race, depressive symptoms, and time spent on Facebook (see Fig. 1). In the second moderated mediation analysis, a more negative interpreta tion bias (as indicated by lower pleasantness ratings) indirectly pre dicted the tendency to feel worse after active public Facebook use through less positive (compared to negative) overall perceptions of Facebook interactions. This indirect effect held regardless of level of thwarted belongingness, adjusting for age, sex, race, depressive symp toms, and time spent on Facebook. Additionally, there was a direct 
277
Fig. 2. Interpretation bias indirectly predicted tendency to feel worse after active public Facebook use through (lower) perceptions of positive Facebook interactions, regardless of level of thwarted belongingness. At high levels of thwarted belongingness, more negative interpretation bias directly predicted tendency to feel worse after active public Facebook use. Values shown are unstandardized coefficients, with standard errors in parentheses. Solid lines denote statistically significant paths; broken lines indicate non-significant paths. ∗∗p < .01 ∗p < .05. 
effect of interpretation bias on tendency to feel worse after active public Facebook use at high and moderate, but not low, levels of thwarted belongingness. Effects were tested at low (1 SD below the mean), average, and high (1 SD above the mean) levels of thwarted belong ingness (see Fig. 2.) 
These findings suggest that at high levels of thwarted belongingness, a trait-like tendency to perceive ambiguous cues as more negative may contribute to negative mood after active Facebook interaction in the public setting, potentially because negative interpersonal interpreta tions may hold greater weight for people with unmet belonging needs, confirming their sense of disconnectedness and heightening negative affect. Thus, these social-cognitive vulnerabilities together could play a role in turning even a form of Facebook interaction that is considered more adaptive (i.e., active use) maladaptive, lending support to the idea that it may not be just factors related to Facebook itself or how one uses it that influence mental health but also personal characteristics that influence perceptions of what happens on Facebook. 
Taken together, these findings provide preliminary support for the idea that individual differences in cognition and belonging may influ ence perceptions of Facebook interactions and moderate the relation ship between active Facebook use and mood. Although previous re search suggests that active Facebook use is largely adaptive, it is especially important to understand whether its benefits extend to those with elevated risk for psychopathology, given that research suggests that these individuals may be more motivated to use Facebook (Song et al., 2014). Individuals with elevated thwarted belongingness, in particular, are in need of positive interpersonal experiences that dis confirm their perceptions of not belonging; instead, cognitive biases 
N. Macrynikola and R. Miranda Computers in Human Behavior 97 (2019) 271–279 
and their underlying expectations of low relational success may lead to a distortion of interactions in the digital context and reinforce feelings of disconnectedness. Given the prevalence of Facebook use especially among young adults, the accumulation of negative digital social ex periences may, over time, strengthen a sense of disconnectedness and maintain low mood, setting the stage for the onset, maintenance, or exacerbation of psychopathology. 
3.6. Strengths and limitations 
The present study addressed several gaps in the literature on Facebook use and its psychological outcomes. First, most studies have examined Facebook use in terms of overall use instead of focusing on specific styles of Facebook use. This study took a more contextualized approach, contributing to research on the differential impact of active and passive Facebook uses on socioemotional outcomes. Second, little research has taken into account how individual differences, particularly those related to cognition, may influence Facebook use and its out comes. Only a handful of studies of which we are aware have in vestigated rumination and Facebook use (Davila et al., 2012; Feinstein et al., 2013; Shaw et al., 2015), and none have examined interpretation bias in the context of Facebook. Third, there is little research on the relationship between the construct of thwarted belongingness, which is implicated in many types of psychopathology from depression to sui cide, specifically, and digital experiences. By examining this construct in relation to the digital social context, we can begin to better under stand the digital influence on the mental health of those who are at highest risk for negative mental health outcomes. 
It is noteworthy that effect sizes in this study were small to medium. It may be that relationships among variables of interest are not as ro bust as hypothesized; however, it is also possible that study limitations may have weakened these relationships. First, although hypotheses centered on the idea that digital interaction has greater potential for ambiguity than in-person interaction and thus necessitates a greater reliance on information processing tendencies and underlying social expectations, this assumption was not directly tested in this study. It may be that Facebook interaction is ambiguous only in certain contexts; when it is not, negative interpretation bias may not necessarily com promise perceptions of Facebook interaction and mood. Thus, the re lationship between cognitive biases and mood outcomes may not have been as strong as they may have been had this study been designed to examine only ambiguous interactions. Furthermore, it may be that people with a more negative interpretation bias find ways to minimize ambiguity: They may limit private interactions to involve only close Facebook friends they trust, or they may engage less in active public use, for example. Supporting this idea, there was indeed a negative association between a more negative interpretation bias and active public use. Research suggests that neurotic individuals, who are more predisposed to anxiety, tend to avoid ambiguity, which prevents dis confirmation of inaccurate ideas (Lommen, Engelhard, & van den Hout, 2010); thus, it may be that those with a more negative interpretation bias tend to avoid active public use because messages that go un answered by an entire social network (versus just one friend) may re present a more threatening kind of ambiguous social context that has the potential for heightened perceived rejection. 
Second, our study relied on self-reported data collected remotely, which is not an ideal method for gathering information on mood after Facebook use, for several reasons. Participants may have responded less thoughtfully than if the study were administered in a more controlled setting. We adjusted for this factor by excluding data from participants who took too little or too much time to complete the survey. Additionally, people may not readily perceive a connection between Facebook use and mood change. Some research suggests that the ne gative effects of Facebook use (i.e., feelings of disconnectedness) tran spire gradually on Facebook, without the awareness of the user (Sagioglou & Greitemeyer, 2014). Thus, the self-report nature of our 
278
study may have prevented the detection of subtle changes in mood after Facebook use. Other research suggests that mood effects of Facebook use are not immediate but become apparent by the end of the day (Verduyn et al., 2015). This potential delay may limit one's ability to accurately perceive and self-report the connection between Facebook uses and mood. 
Third, mood may not be most proximal to the effects of inter pretation bias during Facebook use. A more negative interpretation bias tends to correlate with depression; thus, people with this bias may experience fewer fluctuations in mood, given that their mood may al ready be low. Another potential outcome variable that may better capture the negative effects of Facebook use is state self-esteem. Negative interpretations during active use may incite self-evaluation and lead to the discounting of one's relational value. 
Finally, cognitive biases in this study were measured generally, not in the Facebook context, limiting conclusions about the role these biases play specifically during Facebook use. Additionally, our measure of interpretation bias assessed interpretations to a variety of scenarios not limited to the interpersonal realm. Yet the interpretations that we propose may cause harm during Facebook interaction are those that are interpersonal in nature. It is these negative interpersonal interpreta tions that may have a greater impact on mood, particularly for people with thwarted belongingness. 
4. Conclusions 
Given the prevalence of Facebook, particularly among young adults, it is important to understand the conditions under which Facebook use becomes maladaptive to prevent the accumulation of negative digital social experiences that can impact perceptions of belonging and mood. Findings from the present study suggest that even active Facebook use (a Facebook use style that tends to be adaptive) may turn maladaptive in the presence of social-cognitive vulnerabilities that may become re levant in the digital social context. Moreover, the present study found preliminary evidence supporting the idea that these vulnerabilities may work together to negatively impact mood and perceptions of digital interactions after active Facebook use. Given the cross-sectional nature of this study, however, further research is warranted to replicate find ings, with the ultimate goal of protecting vulnerable individuals from the potential harms of Facebook use. 
Funding 
This research did not receive any specific grant from funding agencies in the public, commercial, or not-for-profit sectors. 
Declarations of interest 
None. 
Acknowledgements 
The authors would like to thank Dr. Cheryl Carmichael for com ments on a previous version of this manuscript. 
References 
Baumeister, R. F., & Leary, M. R. (1995). The need to belong: Desire for interpersonal attachments as a fundamental human motivation. Psychology Bulletin, 117(3), 497–529. 
Beck, A. T. (1967). Depression: Clinical, experimental, and theoretical aspects. New York: Hoeber Medical Division, Harper & Row. 
Berna, C., Lang, T. J., Goodwin, G. M., & Holmes, E. A. (2011). Developing a measure of interpretation bias for depressed mood: An ambiguous scenarios test. Personality and Individual Differences, 51(3), 349–354. 
Brozovich, F., & Heimberg, R. G. (2011). The relationship of post-event processing to self evaluation of performance in social anxiety. Behavior Therapy, 42(2), 224–235. Burke, M., & Kraut, R. (2014). Growing closer on Facebook: Changes in tie strength through 
N. Macrynikola and R. Miranda Computers in Human Behavior 97 (2019) 271–279 
social network site use. Paper presented at the proceedings of the SIGCHI conference on human factors in computing systems. 
Burke, M., Marlow, C., & Lento, T. (2010). Social network activity and social well-being. Paper presented at the proceedings of the SIGCHI conference on human factors in com puting systems. 
Butler, G., & Mathews, A. (1983). Cognitive processes in anxiety. Advances in Behaviour Research and Therapy, 5(1), 51–62. 
Cacioppo, J. T., Hawkley, L. C., & Thisted, R. A. (2010). Perceived social isolation makes me sad: 5-year cross-lagged analyses of loneliness and depressive symptomatology in the chicago health, aging, and social relations study. Psychology and Aging, 25(2), 453–463. 
Davila, J., Hershenberg, R., Feinstein, B. A., Gorman, K., Bhatia, V., & Starr, L. R. (2012). Frequency and quality of social networking among young adults: Associations with depressive symptoms, rumination, and corumination. Psychology of Popular Media Culture, 1(2), 72–86. 
Deters, F., & Mehl, M. R. (2013). Does posting Facebook status updates increase or de crease loneliness? An online social networking experiment. Social Psychological and Personality Science, 4(5). 
Feinstein, B. A., Hershenberg, R., Bhatia, V., Latack, J. A., Meuwly, N., & Davila, J. (2013). Negative social comparison on Facebook and depressive symptoms: Rumination as a mechanism. Psychology of Popular Media Culture, 2(3), 161–170. 
Frison, E., & Eggermont, S. (2015). Toward an integrated and differential approach to the relationships between loneliness, different types of Facebook use, and adolescents' depressed mood. Communication Research 0093650215617506. 
Hayes, A. F. (2013). Introduction to Mediation, Moderation, and Conditional Process Analysis: A Regression Based Approach. New York, NY: Guilford Press. 
Haxby, J. V., Hoffman, E. A., & Gobbini, M. I. (2002). Human neural systems for face recognition and social communication. Biological Psychiatry, 51(1), 59–67. Hertel, P. T., & Mathews, A. (2011). Cognitive bias modification: Past perspectives, current findings, and future applications. Perspectives on Psychological Science, 6(6), 521–536. 
Hertel, P. T., Mor, N., Ferrari, C., Hunt, O., & Agrawal, N. (2014). Looking on the dark side: Rumination and cognitive bias modification. Clinical Psychological Science, 2(6), 714–726. 
Hirsch, C. R., Meeten, F., Krahé, C., & Reeder, C. (2016). Resolving ambiguity in emo tional disorders: The nature and role of interpretation biases. Annual Review of Clinical Psychology, 12, 281–305. 
Jelenchick, L. A., Eickhoff, J. C., & Moreno, M. A. (2012). “Facebook depression?” social networking site use and depression in older adolescents. Journal of Adolescent Health, 52(1), 128–130. 
Joiner, T. E., Lewinsohn, P. M., & Seeley, J. R. (2002). The core of loneliness: Lack of pleasurable engagement–more so than painful disconnection–predicts social impair ment, depression onset, and recovery from depressive disorders among adolescents. Journal of Personality Assessment, 79(3), 472–491. 
Kleim, B., Thörn, H. A., & Ehlert, U. (2014). Positive interpretation bias predicts well being in medical interns. Frontiers in Psychology, 5. 
Kraemer, H. C., Stice, E., Kazdin, A., Offord, D., & Kupfer, D. (2001). How do risk factors work together? Mediators, moderators, and independent, overlapping, and proxy risk factors. American Journal of Psychiatry, 158(6), 848–856. 
Krasnova, H., Widjaja, T., Buxmann, P., Wenninger, H., & Benbasat, I. (2015). Research note—why following friends can hurt you: An exploratory investigation of the effects of envy on social networking sites among college-age users. Information Systems Research, 26(3), 585–605. 
Kross, E., Verduyn, P., Demiralp, E., Park, J., Lee, D. S., Lin, N., ... Ybarra, O. (2013). Facebook use predicts declines in subjective well-being in young adults. PLoS One, 8(8), e69841. 
Lee, E., Ahn, J., & Kim, Y. J. (2014). Personality traits and self-presentation at Facebook. Personality and Individual Differences, 69, 162–167. 
Liu, R. T., Kraines, M. A., Massing-Schaffer, M., & Alloy, L. B. (2014). Rejection Sensitivity and depression: Mediation by stress generation. Psychiatry, 77(1), 86–97. Lommen, M. J. J., Engelhard, I. M., & van den Hout, M. A. (2010). Neuroticism and avoidance of ambiguous stimuli: Better safe than sorry? Personality and Individual Differences, 49(8), 1001–1006. 
Mathews, A., & MacLeod, C. (2007). Cognitive vulnerability to emotional disorders. Annual Review of Clinical Psychology, 1, 167–195. 
Mennin, D. S., McLaughlin, K. A., & Flanagan, T. J. (2009). Emotion regulation deficits in generalized anxiety disorder, social anxiety disorder, and their co-occurrence. Journal of Anxiety Disorders, 23(7), 866–871. 
Moberg, F. B., & Anestis, M. D. (2015). A preliminary examination of the relationship between social networking interactions, Internet use, and thwarted belongingness. Crisis, 36(3), 187–193. 
Morrison, C. M., & Gore, H. (2010). The relationship between excessive internet use and 279
depression: A questionnaire-based study of 1,319 young people and adults. Psychopathology, 43(2), 121–126. 
Nabi, R. L., Prestin, A., & So, J. (2013). Facebook friends with (health) benefits? Exploring social network site use and perceptions of social support, stress, and well-being. Cyberpsychology, Behavior, and Social Networking, 16(10), 721–727. 
Nolen-Hoeksema, S. (1991). Responses to depression and their effects on the duration of depressive episodes. Journal of Abnormal Psychology, 100(4), 569–582. Nolen-Hoeksema, S., & Morrow, J. (1991). A prospective study of depression and post traumatic stress symptoms after a natural disaster: The 1989 Loma Prieta earthquake. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 61(1), 115–121. 
Nolen-Hoeksema, S., Wisco, B. E., & Lyubomirsky, S. (2008). Rethinking rumination. Perspectives on Psychological Science, 3(5), 400–424. 
Pantic, I., Damjanovic, A., Todorovic, J., Topalovic, D., Bojovic-Jovic, D., Ristic, S., et al. (2012). Association between online social networking and depression in high school students: Behavioral physiology viewpoint. Psychiatria Danubina, 24(1), 90–93. 
Pew Research Center. (2018). Social media fact sheet. Pew research center website. Retrieved March 31, 2018 from www.pewinternet.org/fact-sheet/social-media. Radloff, L. S. (1977). The CES-D scale: A self-report depression scale for research in the general population. Applied Psychological Measurement, 1(3), 385–401. Ryan, T., & Xenos, S. (2011). Who uses Facebook? An investigation into the relationship between the big five, shyness, narcissism, loneliness, and Facebook usage. Computers in Human Behavior, 27(5), 1658–1664. 
Sagioglou, C., & Greitemeyer, T. (2014). Facebook's emotional consequences: Why Facebook causes a decrease in mood and why people still use it. Computers in Human Behavior, 35, 359–363. 
Seidman, G. (2013). Self-presentation and belonging on Facebook: How personality in fluences social media use and motivations. Personality and Individual Differences, 54(3), 402–407. 
Selfhout, M. H., Branje, S. J., Delsing, M., ter Bogt, T. F., & Meeus, W. H. (2008). Different types of internet use, depression, and social anxiety: The role of perceived friendship quality. Journal of Adolescence, 32(4), 819–833. 
Shakya, H. B., & Christakis, N. A. (2017). Association of Facebook use with compromised well-being: A longitudinal study. American Journal of Epidemiology, 185(3), 203–211. Shaw, A. M., Timpano, K. R., Tran, T. B., & Joormann, J. (2015). Correlates of Facebook 
usage patterns: The relationship between passive Facebook use, social anxiety symptoms, and brooding. Computers in Human Behavior, 48, 575–580. Sheldon, K. M., Abad, N., & Hinsch, C. (2011). A two-process view of Facebook use and relatedness need-satisfaction: Disconnection drives use, and connection rewards it. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 100(4), 766–775. 
Song, H., Zmyslinski-Seelig, A., Kim, J., Drent, A., Victor, A., Omori, K., et al. (2014). Does Facebook make you lonely? Computers in Human Behavior, 36(C), 446–452. Thoits, P. A. (2011). Mechanisms linking social ties and support to physical and mental health. Journal of Health and Social Behavior, 52(2), 145–161. 
Toma, C. L., & Hancock, J. T. (2013). Self-affirmation underlies Facebook use. Personality and Social Psychology Bulletin, 39(3), 321–331. 
Treynor, W., Gonzalez, R., & Nolen-Hoeksema, S. (2003). Rumination reconsidered: A psychometric analysis. Cognitive Therapy and Research, 27(3), 247–259. Valenzuela, S., Park, N., & Kee, K. F. (2009). Is there social capital in a social network site Facebook use and college students'life satisfaction, trust and participation? Journal of Computer-Mediated Communication, 14, 875–901. 
Van Heijnsbergen, C. C. R. J., Meeren, H. K. M., Grezes, J., & de Gelder, B. (2007). Rapid detection of fear in body expressions: An ERP study. Brain Research, 1186, 233–241. Van Orden, K. A., Cukrowicz, K. C., Witte, T. K., & Joiner, T. E. (2012). Thwarted be longingness and perceived burdensomeness: Construct validity and psychometric properties of the interpersonal needs questionnaire. Psychological Assessment, 24(1), 197–215. 
Van Orden, K. A., Witte, T. K., Cukrowicz, K. C., Braithwaite, S., Selby, E. A., & Joiner, T. E. (2010). The interpersonal theory of suicide. Psychology Review, 117(2), 575–600. Vassilopoulos, S. P., & Watkins, E. R. (2009). Adaptive and maladaptive self-focus: A pilot 
extension study with individuals high and low in fear of negative evaluation. Behavior Therapy, 40(2), 181–189. 
Verduyn, P., Lee, D. S., Park, J., Shablack, H., Orvell, A., Bayer, J., & Kross, E. (2015). Passive Facebook usage undermines affective well-being: Experimental and long itudinal evidence. Journal of Experimental Psychology: General, 144(2), 480–488. 
Verduyn, P., Ybarra, O., Résibois, M., Jonides, J., & Kross, E. (2017). Do social network sites enhance or undermine subjective well-being? A critical Review. Social Issues and Policy Review, 11(1), 274–302. 
Wenninger, H., Krasnova, H., & Buxmann, P. (2014). Activity matters: Investigating the influence of Facebook on life satisfaction of teenage users. Paper presented at the 22nd European Conference on Information Systems. (Tel Aviv, Israel). 
Wisco, B. E., & Nolen-Hoeksema, S. (2010). Interpretation bias and depressive symptoms: The role of self-relevance. Behaviour Research and Therapy, 48(11), 1113–1122.