Progress in Palliative Care 
Science and the Art of Caring 
ISSN: (Print) (Online) Journal homepage: https://www.tandfonline.com/loi/yppc20 
Facebook Recruitment for Children with Advanced Cancer and Their Parents: Lessons from a Web based Pediatric Palliative Intervention Study 
Eunji Cho, Mary Jo Gilmer, Debra L. Friedman, Verna L. Hendricks-Ferguson, Pamela S. Hinds & Terrah Foster Akard 
To cite this article: Eunji Cho, Mary Jo Gilmer, Debra L. Friedman, Verna L. Hendricks-Ferguson, Pamela S. Hinds & Terrah Foster Akard (2021) Facebook Recruitment for Children with Advanced Cancer and Their Parents: Lessons from a Web-based Pediatric Palliative Intervention Study, Progress in Palliative Care, 29:5, 264-271, DOI: 10.1080/09699260.2021.1898077 
To link to this article: https://doi.org/10.1080/09699260.2021.1898077 
© 2021 The Author(s). Published by Informa   
UK Limited, trading as Taylor & Francis 
Group 
  
Published online: 29 Mar 2021. 
  
Submit your article to this journal    
  
Article views: 1733 
  
View related articles    
  
View Crossmark data  
Full Terms & Conditions of access and use can be found at 
https://www.tandfonline.com/action/journalInformation?journalCode=yppc20 
Facebook Recruitment for Children with Advanced Cancer and Their Parents: Lessons from a Web-based Pediatric Palliative Intervention Study 
Eunji Cho 1, Mary Jo Gilmer 1,2, Debra L. Friedman 3, Verna L. Hendricks Ferguson 4, Pamela S. Hinds 5,6, Terrah Foster Akard 1,2 
1School of Nursing, Vanderbilt University, Nashville, Tennessee, USA, 2School of Medicine, Vanderbilt University, Nashville, Tennessee, USA, 3Division of Hematology-Oncology, Vanderbilt University Medical Center and Vanderbilt-Ingram Cancer Center, Nashville, Tennessee, USA, 4Trudy Busch Valentine School of Nursing, Saint Louis University, St. Louis, Missouri, USA, 5Department of Nursing Science, Professional Practice & Quality, Children’s National Health System, George Washington University, Washington, DC, USA, 6Department of Pediatrics, George Washington University, Washington, DC, USA 
Participant recruitment for pediatric palliative intervention studies is a chronic challenge for researchers. Digital recruitment strategies, or digital technology-assisted recruitment methods used to remotely reach and enroll research subjects, can help address these recruitment challenges for pediatric palliative care clinical trials. This study (a) describes Facebook recruitment procedures targeting children with cancer and their parents for a pediatric palliative intervention randomized clinical trial, (b) reports recruitment results, and (c) discusses successful strategies to recruit pediatric populations via Facebook advertisements. Researchers used Facebook advertisements to recruit children with advanced cancer (aged 7–17 years) for a web-based legacy intervention. Between years 2015 and 2018, our research team enrolled 150 child–parent dyads (N = 300) to participate in the web-based legacy program. Results suggest that Facebook advertisements can be a successful tool to access and recruit pediatric populations with life-threatening conditions. Further research is needed to determine how innovative social-media recruitment strategies could be used in other populations of patients with serious illnesses and their caregivers to further advance the science in palliative care. 
Keywords: digital recruitment, Facebook, pediatric palliative care, childhood cancer 
Introduction 
Recruitment barriers create significant challenges for pediatric palliative care researchers. Poor recruitment and retention rates can lead to a waste of research resources and poor-quality results that cannot be generalized to other patient groups.1–4 This challenge may be caused in part by the limited number of potential subjects, families’ needs and preferences about study partici pation including a reluctance to have time away from their very ill child, lack of communication opportunities during the consent process, and pro fessional gatekeeping.4–7 Many pediatric palliative researchers use multisite studies to achieve adequate sample sizes8 or limited numbers of participants 
Correspondence to: Eunji Cho Vanderbilt University School of Nursing, 461 21st Ave S, Nashville, TN 37240, United States. Email: eunji.cho@ vanderbilt.edu 
due to small pools of eligible children with serious health conditions. Potential participants often have limited opportunities to clarify their understanding of the study during the consent process, which can lead to poor recruitment and retention rates.9 Recruitment through clinical gate keepers also poses additional challenges, even though it is the most common recruitment method for pediatric palliative clinical trials. As many clinical studies require clinicians’ involvement in recruiting potential subjects, the clinicians’ posi tive perceptions, dedication, and thorough under standing of the study can affect the potential participants’ decisions to join pediatric clinical trials.10,11 Recruiting only participants who receive and accept the clinicians’ invitation can lead to selection bias.5 Thus, finding a direct way to reach a broader pediatric population that may be 
© 2021 The Author(s). Published by Informa UK Limited, trading as Taylor & Francis Group 
This is an Open Access article distributed under the terms of the Creative Commons Attribution-NonCommercial-NoDerivatives License (http://creativecommons. org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0/), which permits non-commercial re-use, distribution, and reproduction in any medium, provided the original work is properly cited, and is not altered, transformed, or built upon in any way. 
264
DOI 10.1080/09699260.2021.1898077 Progress in Palliative Care 2021 VOL. 29 NO. 5 
Eunji Cho et al. Facebook Recruitment for Children with Advanced Cancer and Their Parents 
interested in participating in such palliative clinical trials and would provide accurate study information is essential for a successful research process. 
Digital recruitment, a digital technology-assisted recruitment method used to remotely reach and enroll research subjects,12 is one strategy that may help address recruitment challenges for pediatric pal liative care clinical trials. Digital recruitment allows investigators to reach a large pool of eligible partici pants, introduce their studies, monitor the recruit ment process, and complete enrollment remotely, using diverse digital tools.12 In the past decade, various digital recruitment strategies have begun to emerge, while traditional recruitment methods have revealed their limitations with low participation rates and poor efficiency.2 Digital tools such as media and online advertisements, internet sites and forums, email, mobile applications, and social media have par ticularly been used to guide potential participants to locate trials for which they may be eligible and help investigators to reach them.1 Specifically, social media can easily expose potential participants to study information via computers and mobile devices.3 
Among many social media platforms, Facebook can serve as a useful recruitment tool for researchers by providing customized paid advertisements and exposure rate check metrics.3 Facebook is one of the largest global social networks and has 2.5 billion monthly active users, thereby offering researchers a platform to reach a large number of potential partici pants.13 By using Facebook’s micro-targeting algor ithm, researchers can create various types of advertisements tailored to specific study objectives and targets.13 Researchers can easily expose advertise ments to potential subjects based on their personal characteristics, and due to the ubiquitous nature of Facebook, a target population can easily check these advertisements via their electronic devices.3 Facebook recruitment has been successfully applied in studies for hard-to-reach populations, such as vaccine-hesitant parents,14 low-income women,15 immigrant health care providers,16 and kidney trans plant recipients,17 and is less expensive and time con suming than other recruitment methods.18 
Few palliative care studies have used Facebook recruitment, especially for children with serious con ditions and their family members. While this popu lation has unique characteristics and complex information needs, most palliative studies require planned discussion about sensitive issues for children and their families with a delicate and well-tailored recruitment approach. Despite their impact on research, recruitment strategies have been under reported in many pediatric palliative studies.19,20 In particular, gaps exist for studies reporting results of Facebook recruitment methods in pediatric palliative 
care randomized controlled trials (RCTs). Thus, the aims of this study were to (a) describe a Facebook recruitment procedure targeting children with cancer and their parents for a RCT examining a legacy inter vention, (b) report recruitment results, and (c) discuss successful strategies to recruit pediatric populations via Facebook advertisements. 
Design and Methods 
Facebook advertisements were used to recruit chil dren (aged 7–17 years) with advanced cancer to receive a web-based legacy intervention. Legacy making refers to actions or behaviors aimed at remembering the life of an individual to positively influence the ill person and their family.21–23 The web-based intervention guided children with advanced cancer and their parents to create a digital story for the family to keep and be shared with family and friends, if desired.21 In the following section, we describe the details of the Facebook recruitment method based on the four recruitment plan components—planning, initiating, conducting, and reporting.3 Other results related to the web based legacy intervention have been reported else where.24–28 
Planning 
We have previously used Facebook recruitment methods to enroll children with cancer and their parents.8,29 These preliminary studies guided our methods for Facebook advertising, such as using a survey link in the Facebook advertisement, interest terms, advertisement wording for target audiences, and a flexible advertising approach.8 
Initiating 
The principal investigator (PI) and study team created a study Facebook page and customized advertise ments. Using the Facebook paid function, the study team designed a pool of advertisements, each includ ing a brief study description, photograph, and survey/web link. As our study targeted children with cancer, we carefully developed the study descriptions and pictures with language sensitive to children’s treatment goals. Thus, we did not use the term ‘legacy’ or ‘legacy-making’ in study documents with children or parents, as this could have unintentionally implied that death was imminent. Instead, the project was described as a ‘digital-storytelling project’ for children with cancer. This same terminology was used and well-received by participants and staff in our pilot study.22 We selected royalty-free photo graphs that would engage the target population. The study was approved by the university institutional review board (IRB; #140622). An IRB-approved study description was created and posted on the 
Progress in Palliative Care 2021 VOL. 29 NO. 5 265
Eunji Cho et al. Facebook Recruitment for Children with Advanced Cancer and Their Parents 
study Facebook page. Due to the nature of Facebook recruitment methods, the IRB waived the need for written consent. 
The research team members determined advertise ment goals and interest terms to reach the target audi ence. Among several Facebook advertisement cost models (e.g., cost-per-thousand-impressions, cost per-like), we selected a pay-per-check option as our goal was for large numbers of interested individuals to click the link and complete the screening survey. As the average cost per click depends on character istics of advertisements and the target audience, we carefully chose advertisement components, target groups, and designated a maximum budget. Legally, individuals must be at least 13 years of age to have a Facebook account. Thus, we aimed to reach parents via Facebook advertisements and then access the chil dren with advanced cancer via their parents. Eligibility criteria included parents who were (a) aged 18 years or older, (b) living in the United States, (c) of any sex, and (d) interested in pediatric oncology (e.g., expressed interest in or liked other Facebook pages related to childhood cancer). Once we created the advertisements and chose the target audience details we wished to reach, including demo graphics, interests, and behaviors, the Facebook system provided estimated daily results (e.g., people reached, link clicks) per designated budget. 
Conducting 
The advertisements were exhibited on Facebook for three years (2015-2018). The PI regularly monitored the posted study advertisements and their perform ances and revised low-performing advertisements by changing the pictures or wording. Some advertise ments included compensation information. In addition, each parent was eligible for a monthly $25 Amazon gift card draw if they completed the screen ing survey and provided their contact information. Two different types of advertising campaigns were conducted. In one type, once users clicked the link in the advertisements, they were taken to a REDCap screening survey that contained brief study descrip tions and screening questions. If the parents were identified as eligible participants, the survey asked parents to provide their names and contact infor mation at the end of this survey. Alternatively, users who clicked the link were guided to a research webpage and had to enter their contact information if they were interested. Either way, once they sub mitted their contact information, the coordinator con 
In the last six months of enrollment, we used additional recruitment strategies to successfully achieve our target sample size. Guided by a paid digital advertising agency, we developed and launched a recruitment video campaign for Facebook and eval uated target audiences. Ten monthly postings about childhood cancer were posted on our study Facebook page to increase the study’s credibility and create emotional connections with potential partici pants. To check the comments or questions left by participants and to answer them promptly, the PI/ coordinator monitored the study Facebook page and the performance of the advertisements daily. 
Reporting 
To measure the impact of our advertisements and par ticipants’ responses, we used the metrics built into Facebook, such as the number of impressions (i.e., the number of times the study’s advertisement appeared on users’ screens) and the number of link clicks (i.e., the number of times that users clicked the advertisement). These data were automatically documented and provided to us by Facebook. 
Results 
Participants responses and characteristics Our Facebook campaign resulted in 508,082 total link clicks to our screening survey. Table 1 summarizes the recruitment responses for each year. Among the 273 parents of children with cancer who were screened for eligibility, 150 child–parent dyads (55%) enrolled in the study to participate in the web-based legacy program (Figure 1). 
Advertisement campaign types 
Our original advertisement campaign consisted of images, textual study information, and a link to a REDCap survey or a study webpage. The advertise ments were distributed throughout the first two and a half years of enrollment. We recruited 89 partici pants in the first year of enrollment, and 20 partici pants in the second year. Due to the declining recruitment rate, we hired a professional agency to 
Table 1 Facebook Recruitment Metrics 
Year 1 Year 2 Year 3∗ 
Total impressions1 27,090,424 7,749,048 7,134,631 Total reached2 4,831,838 2,456,647 1,619,796 Unique clicks3 302,005 177,101 28,976 Cost per result 4 $0.30 $0.17 $0.69 
tacted them via phone or email within one week to 
Number of recruited subjects 
89 20 41 
provide detailed study information and confirm their eligibility. As will be described later, the latter type of campaign was excluded in the early phase of the study because of its ineffectiveness. 
266 Progress in Palliative Care 2021 VOL. 29 NO. 5
∗: Year 3 ad campaign managed by external company 1: Number of times ads on screen 
2: Number of people who saw ads at least once 3: Unique link clicks 
4: Average cost per link click 
Eunji Cho et al. Facebook Recruitment for Children with Advanced Cancer and Their Parents 
  

Figure 1 Recruitment Results 
modify, manage and host the Facebook advertisement campaign during the third year of enrollment by adding a recruitment video, and regularly posting to our Facebook study page to be more engaged and connected with potential participants (Figure 2). 
This modification led us to recruit 41 more partici pants during the final six months of enrollment in Year 3. The recruitment rate increased from 2 to 6 subjects per month and our study Facebook page had 3,895 followers by the end of the campaign. Link click advertisement campaigns yielded the majority (n = 24,269 unique clicks; 84%) of clicks to the REDCap screening survey. In this case, partici pants were asked to complete a brief background information questionnaire and then enter their contact information. On the other hand, driving potential participants to a splash page (n = 4,098 unique clicks; 14%) or to a website (n = 83 unique clicks; <1%) to enter their contact information first was costly and produced limited enrollments. Due to their ineffectiveness, the latter types of adver tising campaigns were promptly withdrawn from the study. 
Costs 
We spent a total of $120,000 purchasing Facebook advertisements in Years 1 and 2 plus additional money paid to the external company that managed the campaign in Year 3 of recruitment. Average cost per click ranged from $0.30 in Year 1, $0.17 in Year 2, and $0.69 in Year 3 (Table 1). Our Facebook adver tising expenses were substantially higher than pre vious studies (e.g., $113029; $5378) due to the large sample size and inclusion criteria targeting a very specific and hard-to-reach population. However, costs remained substantially lower when compared to expenses related to use of multiple data-collections sites and personnel salaries that would have been necessary to recruit the same sample size using tra ditional in-person enrollment methods. Thus, target population characteristics and sample size are driving factors in costs associated with Facebook advertising recruitment methods. 
Communication 
During the advertising period, users communicated with the research team by commenting on the 
  
Figure 2 Recruitment Materials 
Progress in Palliative Care 2021 VOL. 29 NO. 5 267
Eunji Cho et al. Facebook Recruitment for Children with Advanced Cancer and Their Parents 
advertisements or posts on our Facebook study page. The most frequent comments were emotional responses aimed at the target population, such as ‘God bless the children.’ Some users raised questions related to their child’s eligibility to participate in the study. For example, one user asked why their four year-old child could not participate, perceiving that this age group would benefit from the intervention used in our study. We clarified that the intervention was developmentally appropriate for our targeted age group and responded that we hoped to expand to additional age groups in future studies. 
Discussion 
Facebook recruitment strategies could be successfully applied to web-based pediatric palliative intervention RCTs targeting children with advanced cancer and their parents. Traditionally, participant recruitment is one of the biggest challenges in pediatric palliative research.20 Social media recruitment has proved to be an excellent countermeasure to overcome this chal lenge with lower costs, shorter recruitment times, and a greater reach to hard-to-access populations.18,30 These advantages have also been demonstrated in our study by enabling effective geographically diverse participant recruitment and a sufficient sample size. Also, we reported each step of our recruitment process with enrollment results to provide general guidelines for implementing Facebook recruitment strategies for future pediatric palliative studies. 
We used multiple strategies to maximize the benefits of digital recruitment methods. Advertisement language and photographs were carefully evaluated and selected through multiple team meetings and pre liminary tests due to the sensitive nature of palliative clinical trials for our target population. Engagement strategies included adding a video and regular posts to the study Facebook page to increase our presence and emotional connection with potential participants. Users could actively learn about the study and easily communicate with the research team through our study Facebook advertisements and research page. Potential subjects could be fully informed about the study and carefully consider the benefits and risks of participating. Moreover, we were able to successfully recruit children with advanced cancer by targeting their parents since many adults have Facebook accounts. We frequently checked the advertisements’ performance and made modifications when necessary for low performing ads. Having potential participants first answer a brief background information question naire and then provide their contact information for future contact was more effective for recruitment, than first collecting their names and phone numbers/email addresses. Asking non-sensitive 
268 Progress in Palliative Care 2021 VOL. 29 NO. 5
screening and demographic questions first and then collecting more personal information may reduce any psychological barriers and build a sense of trust between the researchers and potential participants. As a result of this effort, 55% of users who were screened for eligibility were enrolled in the study (n = 150 dyads), and 98 dyads (65%) were included in the analysis sample for primary study outcomes.21 This was an encouraging result compared with the retention rate of other intervention studies that involved patient-support person dyads, which have ranged from 36 to 100%.31,32 We will continue to investigate effective strategies to improve recruitment and retention rates through Facebook recruitment methods. 
Despite the promising findings, demographic factors of the target population may impact success of Facebook recruitment.33 A review of 30 medical studies using social media recruitment strategies pro vided evidence that only 12 out of 30 studies showed better recruitment outcomes than those that used tra ditional recruitment methods.34 Our Facebook cam paign recruited parents who were mostly female, white, non-Hispanic, living in the middle-west region, and college-level educated.21 This finding is consistent with the study by Whitaker et al.18 who found that Facebook recruitment methods attracted more responses from young, white, females. For optimal results, researchers should clearly identify the characteristics of their target populations and determine whether Facebook recruitment is the best strategy to successfully complete study aims. In some research situations, such as seeking an ethically diverse sample, supplemental strategies could be implemented given the recognition of access to inter net surveys may be overrepresented by white middle class females. Researchers can pilot various advertise ments for a short period of time and select the most effective advertisements tailored to the specific needs of their target audiences. 
While Facebook recruitment has been identified as an effective research strategy, ethical considerations, such as breach of privacy and confidentiality, recruit ment bias, and data security, have been raised.3,34,35 The Facebook system can reveal users’ private infor mation that has not been disclosed to other users by displaying comments and tags on the advertisements or by leaving an unconscious online trail.35,36 To promote an ethical recruitment process and prevent any unintentional harm to potential participants, researchers should be fully informed of the latest Facebook policies, design the best suited recruitment modality, and discuss wordings in the advertisements with the pertinent IRBs at the early stages of their research.35 In addition, researchers should clearly understand how social media data is presented, 
Eunji Cho et al. Facebook Recruitment for Children with Advanced Cancer and Their Parents 
carefully review social media research policies and guidelines such as Internet Research Ethics 3.037 and hold frequent discussions with the IRB to provide maximum privacy protection for their partici pants.35,36 Future studies may need to devise ethical guidelines for other digital recruitment methods (e.g., MyChart), specifically tailored to pediatric pal liative clinical trials that use digital recruitment tools. Despite the benefits, Facebook recruitment has several limitations. As this method can be applied only to individuals with access to technology and internet, there is a possibility of selection bias.36 As Facebook recruitment relies on self-report, this method has a potential risk of inaccurate demo graphics or medical information.17 Even though selec tion bias or misrepresentation can also occur using traditional recruitment methods,17,18 researchers should be mindful of the potential impact on internal validity when interpreting the study results and using strategies to prevent these problems. Finally, Facebook advertisements can have a wide range of cost-effectiveness depending on the circumstances and target population. The average cost per click can vary based on multiple factors (e.g., target sex, location, interest). Researchers should therefore care fully budget and consider including a consultant who has experience using Facebook advertisements to assist in determining if and how Facebook could be used to aid in recruitment strategies for their studies. Finally, researchers should keep up with the ever changing Facebook algorithms and the latest technol ogy to use this method most effectively and accurately. With all of this in mind, researchers need to fully understand these limitations when conducting research, collecting data, and interpreting their findings. 
Future studies can consider multiple types of digital recruitment strategies in other potential social media platforms (e.g., Instagram, Snapchat) to reach more target audiences and deliver more detailed study information. Since the ages of individuals using various social media platforms are different,38 further research is needed to examine the effectiveness of various social medial platforms for palliative care research recruitment efforts. Various customized advertising formats, such as slideshows, augmented reality, and playable advertisements can provide more thorough information about a study and help inform potential participants’ decision to participate. Finally, more research is needed to develop specific strategies to target more diverse participants (e.g., male, Hispanic, non-Caucasian). Facebook recruit ment may reduce the potential burden on participants and increase the understanding of study activities that include sensitive topics such as palliative care clinical trials. Ultimately, innovative social media recruitment 
can be an effective tool to recruit vulnerable popu lations to further advance the science to improve care to patients with serious conditions and their family members. 
Acknowledgements 
We thank the children and their parents who gener ously participated in this study. We also thank Drs. Cynthia A. Gerhardt and Barbara Given (study con sultants) for providing guidance on the recruitment approach. We acknowledge Paramore Digital for assisting in Facebook recruitment. 
Disclosure statement 
This work was supported by funding as noted above. The authors report no further conflicts of interest. 
Funding This work was supported by the National Institute of Nursing Research (US) (grant R01 NR015353; ClinicalTrials.gov number NCT04059393; principal investigator: T.F.A.) and NIH/National Center for Advancing Translational Sciences (grant UL1 TR000445). Additionally, this project was conducted in collaboration with the Palliative Care Research Cooperative Group funded by the National Institute of Nursing Research (grant U24 NR014637). 
Data availability statement 
Raw data were generated at the Vanderbilt University School of Nursing. The data that support the results of this study are available from the corresponding author upon reasonable request. 
Notes on contributors 
Eunji Cho, PhD, RN is a postdoctoral fellow at the Vanderbilt University School of Nursing. She received a doctoral degree in nursing from Duke University. Her research interest is exploring the concept of human flourishing in children, adolescents, and young adults with life-threatening conditions and developing psychosocial interventions for this population. 
Mary Jo Gilmer, PhD, MBA, RN-BC, FAAN is a professor of nursing at Vanderbilt University School of Nursing and a professor of medicine (pediatrics) at the Monroe Carell Jr. Children’s Hospital at Vanderbilt. Her research interests focus on ways to reduce suffering in children with cancer through inter ventions such as animal-assisted interactions and pro motion of parent–child communication. 
Debra L. Friedman, MD, MS is the E. Bronson Ingram chair in pediatric oncology and associate pro fessor of pediatrics; leader, Vanderbilt-Ingram Cancer Center Cancer Health Outcomes; and control 
Progress in Palliative Care 2021 VOL. 29 NO. 5 269
Eunji Cho et al. Facebook Recruitment for Children with Advanced Cancer and Their Parents 
program director, Division of Pediatric Hematology Oncology Vanderbilt University Medical Center and Vanderbilt-Ingram Cancer Center, Nashville, Tennessee. 
Verna L. Hendricks-Ferguson, PhD, RN, FPCN, FAAN is the Irene Riddle Endowed Chair at Saint Louis University’s Trudy Busch Valentine School of Nursing, St. Louis, Missouri. Her program of research includes: (a) evaluation of interventions focused on offering earlier discussions by pediatric oncology providers to parents of children and adoles cents with a poor prognosis cancer about the benefits of palliative and end-of-life care support and (b) evaluation of psychosocial focused palliative care interventions (i.e., music, art, and mindfulness) for pediatric and adult patients. 
Pamela S. Hinds, PhD, RN, FAAN is The William and Joanne Conway chair in nursing research and executive director, Department of Nursing Science, Professional Practice, and Quality Outcomes; and research integrity officer and professor, Department of Pediatrics, Children’s National Health System, and The George Washington University, Washington, DC. Her research interests include patient-reported outcomes in pediatric palliative care and the roles of clinicians in supporting families of seriously ill children. 
Terrah Foster Akard, PhD, RN, CPNP, FAAN is an associate professor and director of graduate studies for the PhD in Nursing Science Program at the Vanderbilt University School of Nursing. Her research interests are developing psychosocial inter ventions to reduce suffering and improve quality of life for pediatric palliative care populations. Her research focuses on web-based recruitment methods and legacy interventions for children with serious illness and their family members. 
ORCID 
Eunji Cho http://orcid.org/0000-0002-2540-1535 Mary Jo Gilmer http://orcid.org/0000-0002-1742- 3996 
Debra L. Friedman http://orcid.org/0000-0002- 0589-4176 
Verna L. Hendricks-Ferguson http://orcid.org/0000- 0002-4867-5758 
Pamela S. Hinds http://orcid.org/0000-0001-6491- 6649 
Terrah Foster Akard http://orcid.org/0000-0002- 3488-5869 
References 
1 Frampton GK, Shepherd J, Pickett K, et al. Digital tools for the recruitment and retention of participants in randomised con trolled trials: A systematic map. Trials 2020;21:478. 
270 Progress in Palliative Care 2021 VOL. 29 NO. 5
2 Nelson EJ, Loux T, Arnold LD, et al. Obtaining contextually relevant geographic data using Facebook recruitment in public health studies. Health Place 2019;55:37–42. 
3 Reagan L, Nowlin SY, Birdsall SB, et al. Integrative review of recruitment of research participants through Facebook. Nurs Res 2019;68(6):423–32. 
4 Beasant L, Brigden A, Parslow RM, et al. Treatment preference and recruitment to pediatric RCTs: A systematic review. Contemp Clin Trials Commun 2019;14:100335. 
5 Crocker JC, Beecham E, Kelly P, et al. Inviting parents to take part in paediatric palliative care research: A mixed methods examination of selection bias. Palliat Med 2015;29 (3):231–40. 
6 Norman K. Survey reveals patient recruitment is the biggest challenge in pediatric trials. Appl Clin Trials 2012;21(6). 7 Weaver MS, Mooney-Doyle K, Kelly KP, et al. The Benefits and Burdens of Pediatric Palliative Care and End-of-Life Research: A Systematic Review. J Palliat Med 2019;22(8): 915–926. 
8 Akard TF, Gerhardt CA, Hendricks-Ferguson V, et al. Facebook advertising to recruit pediatric populations. J Palliat Med 2016;19(7):692–3. 
9 Woolfall K, Shilling V, Hickey H, et al. Parents’ agendas in pae diatric clinical trial recruitment are different from researchers’ and often remain unvoiced: A qualitative study. PLoS One 2013;8(7):e67352. 
10 Kaguelidou F, Amiel P, Blachier A, et al. Recruitment in pedi atric clinical research was influenced by study characteristics and pediatricians’ perceptions: A multicenter survey. J Clin Epidemiol 2013;66(10):1151–7. 
11 Schoot RA, van Ommen CH, Caron HN, et al. Accrual in sup portive care trials in pediatric oncology, a challenge!. Support Care Cancer 2012;20(12):3149–53. 
12 Baca-Motes K, Edwards AM, Waalen J, et al. Digital recruit ment and enrollment in a remote nationwide trial of screening for undiagnosed atrial fibrillation: Lessons from the random ized, controlled mSToPS trial. Contemp Clin Trials Commun 2019;14:100318. 
13 Carter-Harris L. Facebook targeted advertisement for research recruitment: A primer for nurse researchers. Appl Nurs Res 2016;32:144–147. 
14 Tustin JL, Crowcroft NS, Gesink D, et al. Facebook recruit ment of vaccine-hesitant Canadian parents: Cross-sectional study. JMIR Public Health Surveill 2017;3(3):e47. 
15 Lohse B. Facebook is an effective strategy to recruit low-income women to online nutrition education. J Nutr Educ Behav 2013;45(1):69–76. 
16 McAleese S, Clyne B, Matthews A, et al. Gone for good? An online survey of emigrant health professionals using Facebook as a recruitment tool. Hum Resour Health 2016;14: 34. 
17 Chung SY, Hacker ED, Rawl S, et al. Using Facebook in recruiting kidney transplant recipients for a REDCap study. West J Nurs Res 2019;41(12):1790–812. 
18 Whitaker C, Stevelink S, Fear N. The use of Facebook in recruiting participants for health research purposes: A systema tic review. J Med Internet Res 2017;19(8):e290. 
19 Beecham E, Hudson BF, Oostendorp L, et al. A call for increased paediatric palliative care research: Identifying bar riers. Palliat Med 2016;30(10):979–80. 
20 Hudson BF, Oostendorp LJ, Candy B, et al. The under report ing of recruitment strategies in research with children with life threatening illnesses: A systematic review. Palliat Med 2017;31 (5):419–36. 
21 Akard TF, Wray S, Friedman DL, et al. Transforming a face-to face legacy intervention to a web-based legacy intervention for children with advanced cancer. J Hosp Palliat Nurs 2020;22 (1):49–60. 
22 Akard TF, Dietrich MS, Friedman DL, et al. Digital storytelling: An innovative legacy-making intervention for children with cancer. Pediatr Blood Cancer 2015;62(4): 658–65. 
23 Foster TL. Personal reflections on legacy making. Palliat Support Care 2010;8(1):99–100. 
24 Robson PC, Dietrich MS, Akard TF. Associations of age, gender, and family income with quality of life in children with advanced cancer. J Pediatr Oncol. 
25 Akard TF, Dietrich MS, Friedman DL, et al. Effects of a web based pediatric oncology legacy intervention on parental coping. Onco Nurs Forum. 
Eunji Cho et al. Facebook Recruitment for Children with Advanced Cancer and Their Parents 
26 Akard TF, Gilmer MJ. Research Cooperative Groups in Pediatric Palliative Care Research. Palliative Medicine Reports 2020;1(1):321–325. 
27 Akard TF, Dietrich MS, Friedman DL, et al. Improved parent– child communication following a RCT evaluating a legacy inter vention for children with advanced cancer. Prog Palliat Care 2020. 
28 Akard TF, Dietrich MS, Friedman DL, et al. Randomized Clinical Trial of a Legacy Intervention for Quality of Life in Children with Advanced Cancer. J Palliat Med 2020. 
29 Akard TF, Wray S, Gilmer MJ. Facebook advertisements recruit parents of children with cancer for an online survey of web-based research preferences. Cancer Nurs 2015;38(2):155–61. 
30 McRobert CJ, Hill JC, Smale T, et al. A multi-modal recruitment strategy using social media and internet-mediated methods to recruit a multidisciplinary, international sample of clinicians to an online research study. PLoS One 2018;13(7):e0200184. 
31 Trivedi RB, Szarka JG, Beaver K, et al. Recruitment and retention rates in behavioral trials involving patients and a support person: A systematic review. Contemp Clin Trials 2013;36(1):307–18. 
32 Badr H, Smith CB, Goldstein NE, et al. Dyadic psychosocial intervention for advanced lung cancer patients and their 
family caregivers: Results of a randomized pilot trial. Cancer 2015;121(1):150–8. 
33 Topolovec-Vranic J, Natarajan K. The use of social media in recruitment for medical research studies: A scoping review. J Med Internet Res 2016;18(11):e286. 
34 Dworkin J, Hessel H, Gliske K, et al. A comparison of three online recruitment strategies for engaging parents. Fam Relat 2016;65(4):550–61. 
35 Kamp K, Herbell K, Magginis WH, et al. Facebook recruit ment and the protection of human subjects. West J Nurs Res 2019;41(9):1270–81. 
36 Benedict C, Hahn AL, Diefenbach MA, et al. Recruitment via social media: Advantages and potential biases. Digit Health 2019;5:1–11. 
37 Franzke AS, Bechmann A, Zimmer M, et al. Internet research: Ethical guidelines 3.0. Retrieved 2021 from https://aoir.org/ reports/ethics3.pdf 
38 Kozinets RV. Introducing: Netnography, qualitative social media research methods, and this book. In: RV Kozinets, (ed.) Netnography: The essential guide to qualitative social media research. Thousand Oaks, CA: Sage; 2020. p. 1–32. 
Progress in Palliative Care 2021 VOL. 29 NO. 5 271