Digital Journalism 
ISSN: 2167-0811 (Print) 2167-082X (Online) Journal homepage: https://www.tandfonline.com/loi/rdij20 
Facebook in the News 
Social media, journalism, and public responsibility following the 2016 Trending Topics controversy 
Matt Carlson 
To cite this article: Matt Carlson (2018) Facebook in the News, Digital Journalism, 6:1, 4-20, DOI: 10.1080/21670811.2017.1298044 
To link to this article: https://doi.org/10.1080/21670811.2017.1298044 
  
Published online: 17 Mar 2017. 
  
Submit your article to this journal    
  
Article views: 8966 
  
View related articles    
  
View Crossmark data   
  
Citing articles: 39 View citing articles   
Full Terms & Conditions of access and use can be found at https://www.tandfonline.com/action/journalInformation?journalCode=rdij20 
  

FACEBOOK IN THE NEWS 
Social media, journalism, and public 
responsibility following the 2016 Trending Topics controversy 
Matt Carlson 
In May 2016, two stories on Facebook’s Trending Topics news feature appeared on the site Gizmodo, the first exposing the human curators working surreptitiously to select news and the second containing accusations that certain curators censored conservative voices. These revelations led to public outcry, mostly from conservatives upset at possible bias and journalists critical of Facebook for its largely secretive and haphazard approach to news. This study examines the response to the controversy as metajournalistic discourse—talk about news that seeks to define appropriate practices and legitimate news forms. It identifies a fundamen tal divergence in the public articulation of Facebook’s role in the larger news ecosystem. Facebook reacted to the controversy by formulating an approach to news as a form of content that, like other content on the site, should be personalized, organized according to popularity in the form of user engagement, and free of editorial control from the social media site. By contrast, journalists positioned news as purposively selected and shared while placing Facebook as an active participant within the news ecosystem and therefore beholden to an enhanced institutional commitment to public responsibility. 
KEYWORDS algorithms; journalism; metajournalistic discourse; social media 
Introduction 
In May 2016, the technology news site Gizmodo published two articles exposing how the social media giant Facebook implemented a team of human curators to guide the algorithms that selected news for its Trending Topics section. The stories not only brought to light the role of humans in what was assumed to be an auto mated feature, but it also raised questions about the amount of judgment they exer cised over the Trending Topics that appeared. Most of the attention went to claims made by an unnamed curator that other curators regularly suppressed conservative news. Facebook was not able to identify any incidents of bias, let alone a systemic slanting, but the perception of a problem opened up opaque practices to broad criti cism and prompted internal reactions by Facebook to repair and protect its public reputation. 
Digital Journalism, 2018 
Vol. 6, No. 1, 4–20, https://doi.org/10.1080/21670811.2017.1298044 
  2017 Informa UK Limited, trading as Taylor & Francis Group
FACEBOOK IN THE NEWS 5
More than just a peak behind the curtain, the Facebook Trending Topics controversy led to a larger discussion regarding the morphing of Facebook into a news platform. This discussion has continued to grow as Facebook confronts its role within the news ecosystem. Shortly after the flap over Trending Topics, the company suffered through criticism for allowing so-called “fake news” stories with no factual basis to proliferate (Guynn 2016), for filtering out newsworthy images that triggered algorithms designed to avoid obscene content (Scott and Isaac 2016), and for contin uing to foster political polarization by generating “filter bubbles” during the 2016 US presidential election (El-Bermawy 2016). Discussions of Trending Topics became a proxy for larger concerns regarding Facebook’s growing role in news distribution, exposing the discomfort that both the site and journalists felt about this role while leading to disagreements regarding the relative strengths and weaknesses of humans and algorithms for selecting and ordering news. These discussions are made more complicated by news publishers’ dependence on traffic from the social media giant as its users increasingly consume, comment on, and share news. The enormity of Facebook’s audience has financial repercussions for journalism, but it also has deeper social consequences for the quality of information and political discourse the public receives. Some of these consequences are being realized already and some are yet to come. 
Social media alter the circulation of news, shifting from a mass communication model marked by the one-way selection and presentation of news (Barnhurst and Nerone 2001) to networks of users who personalize their content, share stories with others, add their comments, and drive story visibility through popularity. In the face of these developments, discussions about Facebook’s growing involvement with news and news organizations should not be seen as superfluous pondering but as part of a crucial interpretive process through which journalistic practices are legitimated or dele gitimated as appropriate ways of public knowing. News forms are not natural entities, but practices that take a material form and whose meanings arise through “metajour nalistic discourse” (Carlson 2016) in which different actors seek to make sense of and position emergent practices. In the Facebook case, these revelations opened up an interpretive space to consider the growing role of social media within the news ecosys tem, questions of institutional responsibility, and the role of algorithms to select and order news. What this discourse reveals is that as Facebook involves itself in news, it becomes bound up in quite old ways of thinking about journalism. This situation raises questions about cultural continuity amidst technological change and the power of enduring news values and institutional systems. 
This article first examines the growth of social media as a site for news consump tion and the role of algorithmic processes in sorting the news. It then examines how Facebook identifies and defines its own role with regard to news and how the site has integrated news stories with its other content. The article then switches to identify per sistent themes in reactions to criticism directed at Facebook by journalists and other speakers, including academics. These critics question Facebook’s commitment to a sense of social responsibility while pulling the site into discourses normally applied to journalistic organizations. The conclusion argues that the ramifications of the incident exceed this particular case to question the expectations of social media sites as news becomes a more significant part of their content. 
6 MATT CARLSON
Literature Review 
Examining the Gizmodo revelations requires careful attention to the context in which this case arose. The first aspect is to recognize the rise of social media within what we might call the news ecosystem—the collective of interlocking organizations through which news is produced and circulated to the public (Picard 2014). Social media fundamentally alter the news ecosystem by providing an alternative system for circulating news that contrasts with the mass communication model that dominated print and broadcast news during the twentieth century. This new terrain for news, with its expansion of actors, sites, and abilities, presents both new potentialities and challenges for the news industry and new rhythms of news consumption, sharing, and commentary for audiences. This focus on the context of the new is countered by an emphasis on enduring understandings of journalism that arise in the findings below. Conceptualizing what this discourse does requires considering the role of metajournalis tic discourse in shaping journalism. 
Social Media and News 
Although this paper zeroes in on a particular case, care must be taken to avoid isolating this incident from the larger discourse surrounding the growth of social media as a site for news. In a study conducted contemporaneously with the Gizmodo revela tions, the Pew Research Center found 62 percent of US adults received news from social media, with 44 percent getting news from Facebook, and this usage is more pro nounced for younger people (Gottfried and Shearer 2016). These numbers continue to rise year over year, just as Facebook continues to grow. Less than 10 years after the site was opened to everyone, it has surpassed 1.7 billion total users and over 1.1 billion daily active users (Constine 2016). Given this reach, Facebook has become the largest platform for news in the world. Yet it is not a traditional publisher. It has no editorial staff but instead relies on users, from individuals to news organizations, to provide con tent and then monetizes content through advertising. This does not equate to a pas sive stance toward content; Facebook’s design choices, from the features it includes to the types of content its algorithms prioritizes, shape the content that becomes visible on the site. 
The growth of Facebook in terms of users and revenue corresponds with difficul ties for the US news industry (Mitchell and Holcomb 2016). As profits for traditional media fall and the pressures to succeed in digital media mount, publishers find them selves needing to capture traffic from social media to secure their future. This leads to a mixed relationship between journalists and social media. Weaver and Willnat (2016) found a mostly positive response by US journalists to social media, with positive assess ments surrounding their use as tools for extracting information and monitoring other journalists withstanding a negative appraisal of their emphasis on speed over accuracy. At the same time, there is growing concern over Facebook’s power over journalism, especially as mobile news consumption matures (Bell 2016). 
With the growth of social media and their usurpation of news distribution practices, scholars have theorized as to how social media are reconfiguring journalism. Hermida (2016) describes a shifting news environment from discrete content packages 
FACEBOOK IN THE NEWS 7
of legacy news and news websites to a social media environment in which users confront a bevy of messages, only some of which are news. Social media transform the news ecosystem by vastly expanding the channels through which news can be created and circulated. For news audiences, social media make news sharing a common part of news consumption. On the micro-level, Facebook alters how news is understood by recontextualizing news stories within the social media space rather than a stand-alone news outlet (Winter, Bru¨ ckner, and Kra¨mer 2015). This allows users to recirculate news stories, which affects how they are perceived (Hermida et al. 2012; Turcotte et al. 2015), as well as leads to questions about how to confront user comments (Hille and Bakker 2014). The growing influence of Facebook as a site for news distribution spurs a rethinking of how certain news styles are well-suited for a model based on sharing rather than broadcasting (Trilling, Tolochko, and Burscher 2016). Yet, as will be seen below, the emphasis on openness and sharing that Facebook places on its users clashes with the opacity of its own algorithmic practices (DeVito 2016). 
The growing role of social media connects to trends associated with computa tional journalism (Anderson 2013b; Coddington 2015). The shift away from human deci sion-making to automated forms of news raises questions about the epistemic practices of news (Carlson 2015). More to the point, algorithms that sort and categorize information raise important critical questions. Gillespie (2014) explores how algorithms affect knowledge practices in ways that are far from neutral or irrelevant. While seem ingly objective in their operation, the design of algorithmic systems depends on deci sions concerning relevance, the availability of particularly sortable data, and the range of potential outputs—all of which have consequences for publics. Algorithms are often “black boxes” in that their inner dynamics are hidden even as the consequences from these dynamics are easily seen. This has led to calls for algorithmic accountability (Diakopoulos 2015) as algorithms take on greater importance in selecting the content that we see. 
Metajournalistic Discourse 
Much recent work in journalism studies tackles the challenges of the digital news room as the rhythms of older media forms have shifted to always on, multi-platform news (Anderson 2013a; Boyer 2013; Usher 2014), including social media (Lasorsa, Lewis, and Holton 2012). To these internal approaches examining how newsrooms and social media companies make and distribute news, we can add a broader view that looks at the public struggle to define what news should be. This perspective does not take news practices, content forms, or the networks in which they circulate for granted. Instead, it argues that the acceptance of any news form as a legitimate discourse for providing knowledge about the world is an interpretive act that is brought about by public arguments supporting a particular form. Journalistic authority is not fixed but the product of repair (Eason 1988), the crafting of a particular cultural image (Zelizer 1992), and ongoing interactions that shape the relational dynamics among various actors, including journalists, sources, audiences, critics, and technologies (Carlson 2017). 
An important conceptual lens through which to view and theorize about processes of legitimation and change within journalism is metajournalistic dis course (Carlson 2016). Journalistic discourse—i.e. news—circulates within a broader 
8 MATT CARLSON
metadiscourse that makes sense of it. To identify a news story as adhering to formal conventions and narrative norms is to activate preexisting notions of what is an appro priate form or narrative. To accept journalism as an important form of cultural produc tion requires connecting to deeper narratives as to what journalism is and how it ought to operate; or, negatively, to reject something or someone as outside the bound aries of journalism is to appeal to a violating of some belief. Metajournalistic discourse provides the vehicle for the formation of shared belief about news as well as a space for contesting competing forms. For example, news controversies (Carlson 2014; Berkowitz 2000) become public moments in which journalists and others define the sig nificance of such developments. The discourse joins the interpretive with the material in its effect on practice (De Maeyer and Holton 2016). At core then, discourses around journalism create shared meanings about news practices. 
The role of metajournalistic discourse is apparent when confronting technological changes that alter basic understandings of what constitutes journalism. Digital media have opened up the realm of mediated communication to a much wider set of voices, which has resulted in competing ideas of what journalism should fundamentally be (Lewis 2012). Clearly, news forms are not static. The history of journalism is one of change (see Barnhurst and Nerone 2001), and much of this change involves new tech nologies (Powers 2012). Social media facilitate the expansion of mediated voices and alter how information circulates. The tight control of communication channels inscribed in mass communication models gives way to a loose array of overlapping networks. The Trending Topics controversy at Facebook provides an important case for connect ing metajournalistic discourse with emergent media forms. 
Method 
The controversy around Facebook’s Trending Topics feature was sparked by an article on the technology news site Gizmodo by Michael Nunez on May 3, 2016, that exposed the behind-the-scenes functioning of Trending Topics. The article begins by recognizing the divided views of Facebook as “the savior or destroyer of journalism in our time,” and this uncertainty leads into an inside look at the human “news curators” hired to make Trending Topics work, with two key revelations. First, the anonymous curators in the article described “grueling work conditions, humiliating treatment, and a secretive, imperious culture” that defined their tenure. They were hired as contractors rather than as Facebook employees, and their role was largely concealed. Second, while Trending Topics appeared to be an automated feature, it fundamentally depended on these news curators to make decisions about what would be included as news and to write summaries. Facebook placed enormous pressure on the curators to work quickly and to maintain a strident neutrality, and the contractors expressed suspicion that their role would be phased out in favor of a fully automated system. 
A week later, on May 9, a second Nunez story bore the more sensational head line: “Former Facebook Workers: We Routinely Suppressed Conservative News.” If the first story revealed Facebook’s haphazard human–algorithmic hybrid approach to news curation, the second revealed its potential consequences for the public sphere. An anonymous ex-Facebook curator alleged that individual curators demonstrated a persis tent bias against conservative news topics or outlets. Less salaciously, the article also 
FACEBOOK IN THE NEWS 9
included curators admitting that they had “injected” hard news stories into the Trending Topics even if they were not the most popular stories surfaced by the algo rithm as part of an effort to make Facebook a destination for serious news. At the same time, curators were instructed to avoid stories about Facebook. These revelations diverge from Facebook’s emphasis on algorithmic decision-making by indicating the amount of human labor involved. As Nunez described it, “Facebook’s news section operates like a traditional newsroom, reflecting the biases of its workers and the institu tional imperatives of the corporation.” 
Nunez’s second story sparked a range of reactions, from outraged conservatives demanding accountability from Facebook to others who used this episode to question the growing power of Facebook as a news distributor and what this position meant. This conversation concentrated attention on Facebook’s role within the news sphere and the sections below examine the discourses that emerged. 
Capturing the public discussion of Facebook across a variety of media channels begins with confronting the difficulty of creating a sample of texts from the variety of sites where such texts appear. This study casts a wide net through a three-prong sam pling technique covering a three-month date range of May 2, 2016 to August 2, 2016. This range includes the publication of the Gizmodo articles, reactions across different media outlets, and the response from Facebook to alter its Trending Topics policies. The first sampling strategy comprised a LexisNexis search to capture traditional media sources (newspaper and broadcast transcripts) indexed in the database. After eliminating dupli cate or irrelevant articles, this sub-sample produced 103 documents. A second batch of articles was collected during the sample period from three digital news industry digests: the Pew Research Center’s Daily Briefing of Media News (http://www.journalism.org/daily briefings/), the Nieman Journalism Lab’s What We’re Reading (http://www.niemanlab.org/ reading/), and MediaShift’s Must-Reads (http://mediashift.org/must-reads/). Several of the articles in this sub-sample linked to additional articles that were added to the sample. This sub-sample produced 25 articles (a secondary check was made to ensure that stories did not show up in both of the first two sub-samples). The third sub-sample consists of press releases and official blog postings on the Facebook site. This search includes stories about Trending Topics as well as other stories about Facebook and news in order to provide context for the site’s developments. This sub-sample had 50 texts. 
In sum, the total sample contained 178 articles. This represents an effort to be as broad as possible in locating articles for the sample. However, the growth of digital media outlets coupled with extensive terrain of social media and blogs prevent any claims that this sample is a definitive census of articles on this topic. Instead of totality, this sampling method is intended to provide a broad enough range to achieve satura tion across the various discourses that appeared. 
The emphasis in this study is on the interpretive discourse surrounding not only Trending Topics but Facebook’s social role in the news ecology. In keeping with this focus on meaning, the articles in the sample were analyzed qualitatively through open and axial coding techniques (Strauss and Corbin 1998). Through close reading, the author worked iteratively from individual articles to identify key themes that emerged. Given the size of this sample and the diversity of the viewpoints expressed, the sections below home in on the most salient and recurring discourses and provide verbatim examples to communi cate the original voice. The following sections summarize these findings, first by examining Facebook’s reaction and then by looking at the wider response. 
10 MATT CARLSON
How Facebook Defines Its News Role 
An informative starting point is Facebook’s public statements about its approach to news and how it articulates an understanding of its role in the public sphere. Face book regularly produces content detailing new or altered products and services, and these texts go beyond description to indicate how and why Facebook operates as it does. To contextualize the Trending Topics case, this section begins by looking at its antecedents through Facebook’s discussion of its evolving role as a disseminator of news and information before turning to its response to the controversy. 
Facebook blog posts regularly indicate a concerted effort to extend the site’s con tent beyond interpersonal updates to include a more robust engagement with news. Two years before launching Trending Topics, a post specified this direction explicitly: “While much of our time is spent communicating with close friends about events in our personal lives, we also use online networks to share breaking news, discuss political issues and learn about new trends” (Eytan Bakshy, January 17, 2012). This quote under scores the uniqueness of Facebook in blurring the boundaries between personal and public discourses. A year later, in 2013, the announcement of an update to the News Feed algorithm reiterated this dual nature through the language of relevancy: “people want to see more relevant news and what their friends have to say about it” (Varun Kacholia, December 13, 2013). This approach to news is not atomized news consump tion, but a networked approach where popularity drives content, personalization is val ued over mass messaging, and active sharing is privileged over passive consumption. Perhaps the clearest expression of Facebook’s ideology can be found in the following statement that the company issued to announce changes to its software: 
Your feed should inform. People expect the stories in their feed to be meaningful to them—and we have learned over time that people value stories that they consider informative. Something that one person finds informative or interesting may be differ ent from what another person finds informative or interesting—this could be a post about a current event, a story about your favorite celebrity, a piece of local news, or a recipe. We’re always working to better understand what is interesting and informative to you personally, so those stories appear higher up in your feed. (Adam Mosseri, June 29, 2016) 
The initial reference to being informed through media consumption echoes social models of journalism as a means of providing news about public affairs. But from here this passage radically transforms into the antithesis of normative models of news con sumption. A news product is not a mess of stories but a carefully arranged hierarchical product carrying the assumption that there is a body of important topics that news consumers, as citizens and members of a community, should know (Carlson 2017). Face book’s tone is anti-paternalist in that it values individual preference dictated through algorithmic learning over collective knowledge dictated by editorial decision-making. The post goes on to state: “We are not in the business of picking which issues the world should read about. We are in the business of connecting people and ideas—and match ing people with the stories they find most meaningful.” The emphasis on relevance is at once a defining characteristic of social media as providing an individualized space within a larger network and with furthering the economic interests of Facebook in keeping users active on the site for longer periods of time to increase advertising revenue. It also indi cates the increased use of algorithms to do the matching. 
FACEBOOK IN THE NEWS 11
This approach to news was built into the creation of Trending Topics in 2014. Facebook’s announcement of the new feature did not present it as a digest of news, but as “a list of topics that have recently spiked in popularity” that was “designed to surface interesting and relevant conversations in order to help you discover the best content from all across Facebook” (Chris Struhar, January 16, 2014). The absence of ref erence to news or journalism indicates the degree to which Facebook sees this feature as something different than a news headline service. Also, from the beginning, Trend ing Topics straddled soft and hard news, explaining its topics as ranging “from the highlights of the Golden Globes to the passing of Nelson Mandela.” This short announcement highlighted key themes for Facebook: the refusal to hierarchize news, the emphasis on popularity and recency as key criteria, and the personalization of con tent according to individual preferences. The post did not mention the human role in facilitating Trending Topics that would later become controversial. 
After Gizmodo published its two stories on the Trending Topics news curators in May 2016, Facebook issued a series of posts defending its product and clarifying its practices. A common attribute among Facebook’s defenses was its positioning of the algorithm as the true content driver while relegating humans to an ancillary function: “Topics that are eligible to appear in the product are surfaced by our algorithms, not people. This product also has a team of people who play an important role in making sure that what appears in Trending Topics is high-quality and useful” (Justin Osofsky, May 12, 2016). The emphasis on algorithms as the principal actor in news selection is meant to stave off criticisms of human subjectivity. It appeals to conceptions of algo rithms as inherently objective, but it does so by suggesting that the most relevant algorithmic input concerns popularity rather than an ideological or paternalistic selec tion of news topics: “First and foremost, the algorithm that surfaces topics eligible for review optimizes for popularity and frequency on Facebook and whether it is a real world event—and does not consider perspective or politics.” This defense ignores the design of the system and the choices behind its implementation as intentional to instead assert an automated objectivity that operates outside the sphere of human bias. Meanwhile, Facebook quelled accusations of human subjectivity interfering with its algorithmically derived system by indicating how news curators were “governed by a set of guidelines meant to ensure a high-quality product, consistent with Facebook’s deep commitment to being a platform for people of all viewpoints.” 
A subsequent post by Facebook’s general counsel reiterated the company’s neu trality through accentuating its inclusivity: “We are proud of the platform and commu nity we have created, and it is important to us that Facebook continues to be a platform for all ideas” (Colin Stretch, May 23, 2016). The site also indicated efforts to lessen the human element in Trending Topics: “As part of our commitment to continu ally improve our products and to minimize risks where human judgment is involved, we are making a number of improvements to Trending Topics” (emphasis added). Again, Facebook located the problem with inherent human subjectivity, which begs the rem edy of increased algorithmic involvement. This move was underscored three months later by an overhaul of Trending Topics. The blog post announcing these changes emphasized the shift away from humans: “Today, we’re making some changes to the Trending feature on Facebook that will make the product more automated and will no longer require people to write descriptions for trending topics” (August 26, 2016). Whereas previously Trending Topics were accompanied by a short description of a 
12 MATT CARLSON
topic written by a human, the new design only included a brief topic name followed by a number indicating the “the number of people talking about that particular topic on Facebook.” In this sense, the algorithm was presented as subservient to the actions of Facebook users. This shift was justified through eliminating human intervention: “making these changes to the product allows our team to make fewer individual deci sions about topics.” 
Facebook’s public explanations of its guiding principles and the practices it put into place to enact these principals indicate a reversal of how news is normally under stood to operate. Instead of news producers dictating to an audience what is impor tant, Facebook privileges the actions of its users to generate a list of news. Instead of a common set of stories, news becomes personalized. This is not to deny strengths regarding Facebook’s role in the news ecosystem. As a platform that allows users to publish, it provides a public space for the discussion and spread of news. In not being constrained by the editorial choices of a few, it is open to a wider range of voices and a diversity of topics. Facebook, as an increasingly important site for news, alters the basic understandings that have long governed the flow of news. The implications for this shift are difficult to discern in the moment, but the Trending Topics controversy created a space to consider Facebook’s role in news in which many different speakers sought to define what was happening and question what news on social media ought to look like. 
Reactions to Facebook 
Gizmodo’s revelations of human news curation at Facebook—and the accompany ing accusations of liberal bias among these curators—sparked a range of responses from journalists and others. These comments stemmed from the common assessment that Facebook had attained significant power within the news ecosystem. Facebook’s extensive reach led the Guardian to confidently call it “the biggest news distributor on the planet” (May 12, 2016), one that the Los Angeles Times (May 11, 2016) characterized as having “more influence than anyone else with 1.5 billion global users.” Facebook marked “a new kind of media gatekeeper” (The Verge, May 10, 2016) for its role in conveying information to its users. This persistent recitation of Facebook’s power to cir culate information spilled over to concern among news publishers regarding the site’s power to direct or restrict traffic to news sites. As Farhad Manjoo put it in the New York Times, “Across the industry, reporters, editors and media executives now look to Facebook the same way nesting baby chicks look to their engorged mother” (May 12, 2016). Facebook’s algorithms created winners and losers among news organizations with strongly felt consequences, according to CNN’s Brian Stelter (May 10, 2016). As a result, the Wall Street Journal’s Christopher Mims summarized the news industry’s atti tude toward Facebook as “terrified” (May 16, 2016). 
These attitudes point to a central irony around Facebook’s role in the news ecosystem. On the one hand, the social media site gives voice to all by allowing its users to share stories and comments while personalizing their news diet. But, in the aggregate, it gives the site concentrated power to bring attention to topics or to make them invisible. Trending Topics sits at the confluence of these two poles. At its core, user engagement increases the popularity of certain topics that in turn raises their 
FACEBOOK IN THE NEWS 13
visibility and drives further engagement from users who see what is trending. The Associated Press labeled this “a self-fulfilling effect” (May 12, 2016). But the site also controls this space and its myriad design decisions and practices affect what becomes visible. 
The tension that the Trending Topics feature raises around Facebook’s role in the news ecosystem is made visible in the following sections. On the one hand, Facebook has been reluctant to acknowledge its journalistic role. Executive Sheryl Sandberg argued, “We’re clear about the industry we’re in—we’re a tech company. We’re not a media company, so we’re not trying to hire journalists, and we’re not trying to write news” (CNN Money, May 17, 2016). Yet journalists and others responded in the opposite way. Critiques of Facebook and Trending Topics placed Facebook within the news ecosystem by defining its role, explaining it motives and normative underpinnings, and identifying its failings. In this last regard, critics regularly lambasted the site for its lack of responsibility in a move that—explicitly and implicitly—propped up the value of journalism as a system of gathering and disseminating information. The following sec tions examine three themes that emerged in articles about Facebook, Trending Topics, and its place in news. The first considers the conflict between the company’s business model and journalistic responsibility. The second examines Facebook’s emphasis on algorithmic practices and how this differs from traditional news, and the third looks at how Facebook’s involvement in news condenses it with traditional news sites and the discourses that surround news. 
The Business of Attention Versus the Business of Journalism 
In a sense, the commercial press has always been based on the aggregation of public attention that could then be sold to advertisers (Hamilton 2004). In particular, the local US newspaper market in the latter half of the twentieth century evolved into a model in which most communities supported a single newspaper, which in turn collected robust profits through its monopoly status. Likewise, technological and gov ernmental restrictions capped the number of local television stations resulting in limited competition for advertising dollars. In the United States and much of the world, a sig nificant portion of journalism continues to rely on advertising subsidies. Nonetheless, critics of Facebook often pointed to its business model as not grounded in the princi ple of news creation, but in getting users to engage with the site, share information, and spend time—whatever the content is. Like mass media, Facebook monetizes atten tion through advertising. But the site does not produce content; it distributes it. Thus, Facebook has no inherent investment in news, either normatively or financially. In the Washington Post, Haylay Tsukayama argued that news came to Facebook because that is what users did with it, not because the site strived to become a news source: “Facebook didn’t aim to become a gatekeeper for the news; that’s a side effect. We could also possibly recognize it’s dealing with something it was never really designed to do” (May 17, 2016). This section examines how journalists and others held Facebook responsible for its growing role within news, and how they identified its shortcomings while propping up traditional news values. 
A chief complaint about Facebook singled out the site’s emphasis on engage ment as being driven by personalized desires rather than the sense of communal 
14 MATT CARLSON
responsibility connected to journalism’s normative discourses. New York Times media columnist Jim Rutenberg noted that the priorities that Facebook specified in the previ ous section do not align with how journalists understand their work: “That system, don’t forget, is devised to keep people on Facebook by giving them what they want, not necessarily what the politicos or news organizations may want them to see. There can be a mismatch in priorities” (May 23, 2016). This sense that news ought to be trea ted as a distinct and socially important type of content also arose in a lament by the Columbia Journalism Review that for Facebook, “news is just another form of content— a commodity—that’s part of the product Facebook sells its customers” (June 10, 2016). These critiques caution merging news with all other social media content. The danger in the agglomeration of content is that Facebook is more motivated by providing users with a pleasing experience than in a sense of public responsibility. The Associated Press’s Barbara Ortutay also argued that “Facebook has an interest in keeping [users] happy, regardless of their political leanings, so that they keep using the service and advertisers keep courting them” (May 12, 2016). 
Criticisms of Facebook for relegating news to generic content did not only ema nate from journalists working for legacy media institutions. Charlie Warzel, a senior wri ter for the digital native news site Buzzfeed, identified the lack of fit between Facebook’s business motives and its place as a news distributor: 
Facebook has made a commitment to deliver news, but only in a manner that doesn’t truly interfere with the overall experience. The central tension with news—giving you what you want to see versus giving you what you need to see—is an intractable one, especially since the former is the foundation on which the world’s biggest social net work is based. (June 29, 2016) 
This statement indicts the social media site for having an interest in news that is driven by business motives rather than an engrained public service mission. It positions social media personalization as incongruous with news. Removing public service from Face book’s core commitments opens up the site to self-serving competitive motives. A front-page story in the New York Times by Mike Isaac summed up Facebook’s desire to get into news in these terms: “Facebook wanted people to search for more content— like news—on its own site instead of on Google, the search king, or Twitter, which was widely regarded as better for real-time news” (May 21, 2016). Facebook competes with these sites for digital advertising, and the pivot toward more news is positioned as economic. 
The derision of Facebook for competitive motives rather than a public service ori entation contributed to suggestions of Facebook’s inferiority compared to news outlets. As the Poynter Institute’s Kelly McBride described Facebook’s ascension within news distribution, “With that influence comes a significant responsibility” (May 9, 2016). The notion of responsibility was regularly made manifest through the institutional mecha nisms of journalism. The New York Time’s Manjoo argued that Facebook “doesn’t think of itself as a news organization with a well-developed sense of institutional ethics and responsibility, or even a potential for bias” (May 12, 2016). Meanwhile, he added, “Many mainstream outlets have a rigorous set of rules and norms about what’s acceptable and what’s not in the news business.” This separation elevates the established news industry for its entrenched norms and practices while portraying Facebook as lacking. Fortune’s Mathew Ingram asked pointedly that if most news organizations “have at least 
FACEBOOK IN THE NEWS 15
some sort of notional commitment to journalistic principles, including fairness, balance, accuracy, and the greater good of society,” then “what commitment does the Facebook algorithm have to any of these principles?” (May 9, 2016). In a post on Nieman Lab (May 19, 2016), technology scholar Tarleton Gillespie went even further when he wrote that Trending Topics “are not news, they are expressions of interest” that serve as “a means to keep users on the site and involved.” 
Concern with Algorithmic Judgment 
The Gizmodo stories detailed the work of human news curators at Facebook, but they also raised many questions about the role of algorithms in selecting news content. In its public responses to the Trending Topics stories, Facebook regularly privileged its algorithms as the main driver of content selection while diminishing the human role of providing a check on the algorithms. This divide underscored a dichotomization of algorithms as rational, objective, and unbiased, while humans remained prone to unin tentional or purposive distortions (Gillespie 2014). This belief arose at times in the news coverage of Facebook. CNN’s Brian Stelter echoed this division: “The bottom line is that humans, unlike algorithms, have hearts. And the company can’t know for sure what was in the hearts of the workers who were selecting certain stories while rejecting others” (May 10, 2016). This quote positions humans as intractably biased while posi tioning algorithms as incapable of the emotionality that drives bias. Equally prominent was the counterargument that algorithms are purposive constructions and should not be accorded the status of objectivity. 
The common belief in algorithmic objectivity can be attributed to what Manjoo labels “a veneer of empiricism” (May 12, 2016). They appear to be data-driven, but Manjoo and many others pointed to the biases built into the design and implementa tion of algorithms by Facebook. The Washington Post’s Tsukayama wrote that “while we like to pretend data is neutral, algorithms—because they are written by humans—have bias” (May 17, 2016). Similarly, Gillespie argued that a key takeaway from this episode was an acknowledgement that “Algorithms are not neutral. Algorithms do not function apart from people” (May 19, 2016). For evidence of how design choices affect algorith mic news selection, the Guardian (May 12, 2016) pointed to the failure of Facebook’s algorithms to surface news on unrest in Ferguson in 2014 after the shooting of an unarmed black teenager by a white police officer. The story spread quickly on Twitter, but languished on Facebook in what became an embarrassment for the site. 
Critics also argued that Facebook’s algorithms were designed to increase engage ment—and therefore serve the site’s business interests—rather than provide a typical journalistic function. A law professor made this clear in calling Facebook “a business run by people with their own biases and motivations and not simply a neutral conduit for information” (Los Angeles Times, May 19, 2016). Fusion’s Kate Losse (May 10, 2016) pushed the argument further to dispute the false dichotomy between human subjectiv ity and algorithmic objectivity. This mistake “assumes that human editing is ideological whereas the algorithmic editing and surfacing of content is neutral” and instead called Facebook “an engineering department that curates news.” Ingram echoed this argu ment that Facebook shunts its responsibility when falling back on claims of algorithmic objectivity: “Facebook routinely says that it doesn’t see itself as a media entity, and 
16 MATT CARLSON
doesn’t see its algorithmic choices as being of any concern to anyone outside the company—even when those choices help influence the way people think and behave, like whether they decide to vote and how they see political issues” (May 9, 2016). This quote again indicates the degree to which a journalistic mentality—one that is grounded in a public service commitment—becomes visible in arguments about Facebook’s shortcomings. 
Despite these concerns with the algorithmic selection of news content and the accompanying disparagement of human subjectivity, the New York Times’s Quentin Hardy provided prescient analysis when he suggested that Facebook would respond to the Trending Topics controversy by emphasizing automation and deemphasizing humans: “the outcome of this scandal, regardless of whether bias is confirmed, may well be more robo journalism, as Facebook strives to look impartial by letting comput ers do the work” (May 11, 2016). This is exactly what happened. A Facebook spokesper son quoted by the Associated Press (May 24, 2016) put it succinctly: “Based on this feedback, we felt that the best approach would be to clear up this issue by removing these lists [of approved news sources] entirely and focus on surfacing the conversation on Facebook.” As recounted above, humans were largely removed from Trending Topics with the result of Facebook being able to point to automation as a way of avoiding accusations of bias. 
Facebook’s Entanglement with News Criticism 
In dissecting Facebook’s move into news with Trending Topics, the Los Angeles Times’s Tracey Lien wrote: “Such moves have helped Facebook attract users and adver tising dollars—but they have also invited scrutiny more common in the news business than in tech” (May 19, 2016). By involving itself in news, Facebook becomes entangled with pre-existing discourses about journalism. Most visibly, accusations of liberal bias among Facebook’s news curators placed the site within the deep-seated discourse claiming rampant liberal political bias among journalists. Liberal media bias is an impor tant touchstone for understanding contemporary journalism (Carlson 2017). In many ways, bias claims are about control over news narratives. Bias serves as an interpretive frame that primes news audiences to discount news stories (Jamieson and Cappella 2008). The Trending Topics controversy pulled Facebook into this realm of criticism, subjecting the site to similar complaints that follow most US news organizations. For example, Republican National Chairman Reince Priebus labeled it “conservative censor ship” in USA Today (May 12, 2016) while the Drudge Report ran the headline “NOT LEANING IN… LEANING LEFT!” (May 9, 2016). CNN quoted one conservative leader alleging that “Facebook has a history of agitating against conservatives and conserva tive policies” (May 17, 2016). The New York Post characterized it as “liberal elites con spire to hide dissenting viewpoints from the public” (May 10, 2016) and “a hefty political bias” (May 10, 2016). These are familiar charges aimed at news (especially dur ing an election year), but unfamiliar when aimed at a social media site that acts as a conduit for news, but that does not itself produce news. 
Manjoo (New York Times, May 12, 2016) questioned whether bias could really exist at Facebook because of its personalization. His point is that Facebook is not a media outlet in the traditional sense. It does not operate within a mass communication 
FACEBOOK IN THE NEWS 17
paradigm. Because of this, the bias frame so quickly invoked by conservative critics to pull Facebook into a constellation of traditional news outlets (including the New York Times) does not fit. However, efforts to portray the social media site as biased indicated both the uncertainly over what Facebook is and the certainly that its importance for the flow of information increasingly matters. 
The lack of fit for Facebook within the discourse of liberal media bias could also be seen in Mark Zuckerberg’s response. In a post on his Facebook page, Zuckerberg personally combatted claims of bias by accentuating the breadth of the site: 
We’ve built Facebook to be a platform for all ideas. Our community’s success depends on everyone feeling comfortable sharing anything they want. It doesn’t make sense for our mission or our business to suppress political content or prevent anyone from see ing what matters most to them. (May 18, 2016) 
What is notable about this statement is that its argument stresses openness among users as the goal rather than editorial fairness. Journalists respond to bias claims through an appeal to professional norms related to objectivity and fairness. Training and adherence to learned procedures insulates journalists from bias, but Facebook cele brates its users’ subjectivity and promotes its overall openness as combatting any sys temic bias. This is not merely an ideal, but also a financial imperative. The New York Times’s Cecilia Kang made clear the business implications of the episode: “the bias alle gations are particularly thorny because of Facebook’s desire to be a trusted platform for users and media partners” (May 18, 2016). News must be understood through the critical discourses that surround it and shape how audiences interpret it (Carlson 2016), and the same is true for Facebook as it operates as a growing part of the news ecosystem. 
Conclusion 
In the end, the controversy surrounding Trending Topics and news curation is only a minor public relations hiccup for Facebook. It has not dented its growth or success in any demonstrable way. But the dynamics that have emerged in this case connect to deeper questions concerning the growing role of social media within the news ecosystem. Facebook’s convoluted relationship with news continues, with more voices questioning whether the site can remain agnostic with regard to its place in news and arguing instead that Facebook should be more active in regimenting its news function. From this larger vantage point, the Trending Topics controversy is an important case that raises core questions for how to think through the implications of social media sites becoming more and more important platforms for news distribution and curation. From the perspective of metajournalistic discourse, public comments about this case both indicate and shape interpretive frameworks through which we define the boundaries of appropriate actions for the various actors involved. Clear divergences surrounding Facebook’s role in news distribution indicate competing ideas of what the news ecosystem ought to look like. 
In its own explanations, Facebook situates itself as facilitating the exchange of ideas through sharing and conversations across its users. It presents this as a socially beneficial purpose, but does so without the institutional infrastructure and normative 
18 MATT CARLSON
commitments of journalism. Instead, it insists that judgment occurs not at an editorial level but through users’ activity. In doing so, popularity becomes the key criterion for inclusion as a Trending Topic rather than an effort at identifying story importance or content diversity. To make this happen, Facebook leans heavily on algorithms not as powerful actors but as tools that actualize user preferences. Humans, meanwhile, are seen as suspect or deficient in their judgment (Carlson 2015). For Facebook, the solu tion to the controversy surrounding human curators was to eliminate humans as much as possible and to excuse itself from associations with actual news production. 
Facebook alone cannot define its place in the news ecosystem. It exists in a larger discursive context, and the Trending Topics controversy brought forth many counterar guments to Facebook’s strategy of retreating from placing itself with the broader ter rain of journalism. Journalists and others instead pulled Facebook into the discourses surrounding news, which raised questions about the site’s responsibilities within the public sphere and its privileging of algorithmic neutrality while also tying it to questions of political bias that are familiar for news organizations. These charges are problematic for Facebook and its efforts to distance itself from being a news provider. They indicate the complex cultural and political entanglements of journalism. 
These different viewpoints leave open the question of just what Facebook is, what its role in news should be, what responsibilities it has as a platform, and what steps should it take to fit these definitions. The starkest difference in how Facebook and journalists conceptualize responsibility may be summarized as the shift from the news dictating to the audience what is important, to the audience now dictating what news is important. This is a profound turn. Certainly, news selection practices have drawn decades of popular and academic criticism for the patterns they produce. But the shift to popularity likewise draws criticism when important stories fall away. More over, Facebook’s dependence on engagement as the vehicle that drives its advertising revenue does not indicate a commitment to news. News topics that may be important but do not draw a lot of interaction work against its economic model. Ultimately, Face book has adjusted how it approaches news, relying more on algorithms to personalize content in ways that are still developing as it fends off continual criticism. Given its reach and its courting of news publishers, clashes over the site’s responsibility as a plat form for news will continue in the future. 
DISCLOSURE STATEMENT 
No potential conflict of interest was reported by the author. 
REFERENCES 
Anderson, C. W. 2013a. Rebuilding the News. Pennsylvania, PA: Temple University Press. Anderson, C. W. 2013b. “Towards a Sociology of Computational and Algorithmic Journalism.” New Media and Society 15 (7): 1005–1021. 
Barnhurst, Kevin G., and John Nerone. 2001. The Form of News. New York: Guilford Press. Bell, Emily. 2016. “Facebook is Eating the World.” Columbia Journalism Review, March 7. http://www.cjr.org/analysis/facebook_and_media.php 
FACEBOOK IN THE NEWS 19
Berkowitz, Dan. 2000. “Doing Double Duty: Paradigm Repair and the Princess Diana What a-Story.” Journalism 1 (2): 125–143. 
Boyer, Dominic. 2013. The Life Informatic. Ithaca, NY: Cornell University Press. Carlson, Matt. 2014. “Gone, but Not Forgotten: Memories of Journalistic Deviance as Meta journalistic Discourse.” Journalism Studies 15 (1): 33–47. 
Carlson, Matt. 2015. “The Robotic Reporter: Automated Journalism and the Redefinition of Labor, Compositional Forms, and Journalistic Authority.” Digital Journalism 3 (3): 416–431. 
Carlson, Matt. 2016. “Metajournalistic Discourse and the Meanings of Journalism: Definitional Control, Boundary Work, and Legitimation.” Communication Theory 26 (4): 349–368. Carlson, Matt. 2017. Journalistic Authority. New York: Columbia University Press. Coddington, Mark. 2015. “Clarifying Journalism’s Quantitative Turn: A Typology for Evaluating Data Journalism, Computational Journalism, and Computer-Assisted Reporting.” Digital Journalism 3 (3): 331–348. 
Constine, Josh. 2016. “Facebook Crushes Q2 Earnings, Hits 1.71 Billion Users and Record Share Price.” TechCrunch. Accessed July 27. https://techcrunch.com/2016/07/27/face book-earnings-q2-2016/ 
De Maeyer, Juliette, and Avery, Holton. 2016. “Why Linking Matters: A Metajournalistic Dis course Analysis.” Journalism 17 (6): 776–794. 
DeVito, Mike. 2016. “From Editors to Algorithms: A Values-Based Approach to Understanding Story Selection in the Facebook News Feed.” Digital Journalism. doi:10.1080/ 21670811.2016.1178592. 
Diakopoulos, Nicholas. 2015. “Algorithmic Accountability: Journalistic Investigation of Com putational Power Structures.” Digital Journalism 3 (3): 398–415. 
Eason, David. 1988. “On Journalistic Authority: The Janet Cooke Scandal.” In Media, Myths, and Narratives, edited by James Carey, 205–227. Newbury Park, CA: Sage Publishing. El-Bermawy, Mostafa M. 2016. “Your Filter Bubble is Destroying Democracy.” Wired, Novem ber 18. https://www.wired.com/2016/11/filter-bubble-destroying-democracy/ Gillespie, Tarleton. 2014. “The Relevance of Algorithms.” In Media Technologies: Essays on Communication, Materiality, and Society, edited by Tarleton Gillespie, Pablo Boczkowski and Kirsten Foot, 167–194. Cambridge: MIT Press. 
Gottfried, Jeffry and Elisa Shearer. 2016. “News Use Across Social Media Platforms 2016.” Pew Research Center. Accessed May 26. http://www.journalism.org/2016/05/26/news use-across-social-media-platforms-2016/ 
Guynn, Jessica. 2016. “Mark Zuckerberg: Facebook Fake News Didn’t Sway Election.” USA Today, November 10. 
Hamilton, James. 2004. All the News That’s Fit to Sell. Princeton: Princeton University Press. Hermida, Alfred. 2016. “Social Media and the News.” In The SAGE Handbook of Digital Journalism, edited by Tamara Witschge, C. W. Anderson, David Domingo, and Alfred Hermida, 81–94. London: Sage. 
Hermida, Alfred, Fred Fletcher, Darryl Korell, and Donna Logan. 2012. “Share, like, Recommend.” Journalism Studies 13 (5-6): 815–824. 
Hille, Sanne, and Piet Bakker. 2014. “Engaging the Social News User.” Journalism Practice 8 (5): 563–572. 
Jamieson, Kathleen H., and Joseph Cappella. 2008. Echo Chamber. New York: Oxford University Press. 
20 MATT CARLSON
Lasorsa, Dominick, Seth Lewis, and Avery Holton. 2012. “Normalizing Twitter: Journalism Practice in an Emerging Communication Space.” Journalism Studies 13 (1): 19–36. Lewis, Seth. 2012. “The Tension between Professional Control and Open Participation: Jour 
nalism and Its Boundaries.” Information, Communication and Society 15 (6): 836–866. Mitchell, Amy and Jesse Holcomb. 2016. “State of the News Media 2016.” Pew Research Center. Accessed June 15. http://www.journalism.org/2016/06/15/state-of-the-news-me dia-2016/ 
Picard, Robert. 2014. “Twilight or New Dawn of Journalism? Evidence from the Changing News Ecosystem.” Digital Journalism 2 (3): 273–283. 
Powers, Matthew. 2012. “In Forms That Are Familiar and Yet-to-Be Invented: American Jour nalism and the Discourse of Technologically Specific Work.” Journal of Communication Inquiry 36 (1): 24–43. 
Scott, Mark and Mike Isaac. 2016. “Facebook Restores Iconic Vietnam War Photo It Censored for Nudity.” New York times, September 9. 
Strauss, Anselm, and Juliet Corbin. 1998. Basics of Qualitative Research. Thousand Oaks, CA: Sage Publications. 
Trilling, Damian, Petro Tolochko, and Bjo¨rn Burscher. 2016. “From Newsworthiness to Shareworthiness: How to Predict News Sharing Based on Article Characteristics.” Journal ism and Mass Communication Quarterly 94 (1): 38–60. doi:10.1177/1077699016654682. 
Turcotte, Jason, Chance York, Jacob Irving, Rosanne Scholl, and Ray Pingree. 2015. “News Recommendations from Social Media Opinion Leaders: Effects on Media Trust and Information Seeking.” Journal of Computer-Mediated Communication 20 (5): 520–535. 
Usher, Nikki. 2014. Making News at the New York times. Ann Arbor: University of Michigan Press. 
Weaver, David and Lars Willnat. 2016. “Changes in US Journalism: How Do Journalists Think about Social Media?” Journalism Practice 10 (7): 844–855. doi: 10.1080/17512786.2016. 1171162 
Winter, Stephan, Caroline Bru¨ ckner, and Nicole Kra¨mer. 2015. “They Came, They Liked, They Commented: Social Influence on Facebook News Channels.” Cyberpsychology, Behavior and Social Networking 18 (8): 431–436. 
Zelizer, Barbie. 1992. Covering the Body. Chicago, IL: University of Chicago Press. 
Matt Carlson, Department of Communication, Saint Louis University, USA. E-mail: mcarls10@slu.edu