Please do not remove this page 
  

Recruiting Hard-to-Reach Populations: The Utility of Facebook for Recruiting Qualitative In-Depth Interviewees 
Weiner, Marc D.; Puniello, Orin T.; Siracusa, Paul C.; et.al. 
https://scholarship.libraries.rutgers.edu/discovery/delivery/01RUT_INST:ResearchRepository/12643428890004646?l#13643548530004646 
Weiner, Puniello, O. T., Siracusa, P. C., & Crowley, J. E. (2017). Recruiting Hard-to-Reach Populations: The Utility of Facebook for Recruiting Qualitative In-Depth Interviewees. Survey Practice, 10(4), 1–13. https://doi.org/10.7282/T3P2722C 
Document Version: Version of Record (VoR) 
Published Version: https://doi.org/10.29115/SP-2017-0021 
This work is protected by copyright. You are free to use this resource, with proper attribution, for research and educational purposes. Other uses, such as reproduction or publication, may require the permission of the copyright holder.
Downloaded On 2022/11/12 10:02:55 -0500 
Vol. 10, no 4, 2017 | www.surveypractice.org 
The premier e-journal resource for the public opinion and survey research community 
Recruiting Hard-to-Reach Populations: The Utility  of Facebook for Recruiting Qualitative In-Depth  Interviewees 
Marc D. Weiner 
Edward J. Bloustein School of Planning and Public Policy 
Rutgers, The State University of New Jersey 
Orin T. Puniello 
Office of Predictive Analytics 
Ketchum Global Research & Analytics 
Paul C. Siracusa 
Edward J. Bloustein School of Planning and Public Policy 
Rutgers, The State University of New Jersey 
Jocelyn Elise Crowley 
Edward J. Bloustein School of Planning and Public Policy 
Rutgers, The State University of New Jersey 
Abstract 
We present a cost efficient methodology for using social media to recruit a low incidence, hard-to-reach population. For qualitative research investigating the  policy implications of divorce later in life, we were challenged to recruit a pool  of qualified respondents to secure 80 in-depth interview subjects of geographic  diversity divided evenly by sex. Although “gray divorce” (i.e., divorce at or over  50 years old) is increasingly common – approximately one in four of all divorces  in the United States now occurs within this age group – the incidence rate of  individuals in the general population meeting these criteria renders traditional  recruitment methods cost-prohibitive. With limited resources and the need for  microtargeting, we turned to Facebook: Over four waves totaling 13 days,  we recruited 178 qualified respondents from which we successfully selected  40 male and 40 female interviewees while preserving geographic diversity. We  specified the characteristics of Facebook users who would be exposed to our 
Publisher: AAPOR (American Association for Public Opinion Research) Suggested Citation: Weiner M. D., O. T. Puniello, P. C. Siracusa and J. E. Crowley.  2017. Recruiting Hard-to-Reach Populations: The Utility of Facebook for Recruiting  Qualitative In-Depth Interviewees. 
Survey Practice. 10 (4). ISSN: 2168-0094 
2 Marc D. Weiner et al. 
solicitation; overall, we generated the respondent pool at a mean cost of $1.18  per respondent, for a total recruitment cost of $210.04. Compared to other  recruitment approaches, the speed and cost-efficiency of this methodology was  overwhelmingly superior. 
Introduction 
Social networking facilitates new ways of contacting hard-to-reach populations.  Facebook – now ground zero for social media – provides previously unimaginable  cost-effective approaches to participant recruitment. Indeed, aware that  “social scientists have sought to utilize it for participant recruitment and data  collection” (Rife et al. 2016), we turned to Facebook to solve our puzzle-at 
hand: Given limited resources and the need for microtargeting, how could we  efficiently recruit in-depth interviewees from a hard-to-reach population? More specifically, for qualitative research investigating the policy implications  of gray divorce (divorce at or over 50 years old), we were challenged to recruit  a pool of qualified respondents from which to secure 80 interview subjects of  geographic diversity divided evenly by sex. Although gray divorce is increasingly  common – approximately one in four of all domestic divorces now occurs within  this age group – the incidence rate of individuals in the general population meeting  these criteria renders traditional recruitment methods cost-prohibitive and/or  too slow; indeed, the common theme behind recruitment through advertising in  magazines, posted notices, or telephone or mail contacting, is that they are all  either too expensive and/or too time-consuming. 
With limited resources and the need for microtargeting, we turned to  Facebook, where, within 13 days spread out over four waves, we recruited 178  qualified respondents from which we successfully selected 80 interviewees while  preserving geographic diversity. We specified the characteristics of Facebook users  who would be exposed to our solicitation: geography (United States), age group  (50–65+), gender, placement of the advertisement on a mobile device (news feed)  and placement on a desktop (news feed or right column of the screen).  
Once a respondent clicked on our Facebook ad, she or he was redirected to  an online screener we administered directly. Overall, we enrolled 178 qualified  respondents at a mean cost of $1.18 per respondent for total recruitment costs of  $210.04. Compared to other approaches, the cost-efficiency is exceptional. This  article details this fast, cost-efficient methodology for using social media to recruit  a low-incidence, hard-to-reach population for qualitative in-depth interviews. 
Literature 
On Hard-to-Reach Populations 
In the late 1940s, Lundberg and Larsen (1949) investigated whether the  personal characteristics and views of survey nonrespondents differed from those 
The Utility of Facebook 3 
of respondents. In so doing, they concluded that the problem of nonresponse is  widespread, since some individuals are difficult or impossible to reach. Similarly,  and beyond probability sampling, in using respondent-drive sampling (RDS)  to recruit prostitutes in Manchester, England for interviews about drug use,  Faugier and Sargeant (1997) highlighted the benefits of a nonrandom sampling  approach when working with hard-to-reach populations. Such a method,  they advised, works in the absence of an adequate sampling frame or when  respondents are prone to hide their involvement because of a topic’s sensitivity. 
Managing cost-effective data collection or recruitment from low-incidence,  hard-to-reach populations is a challenge for which instructive lessons can be  drawn from literature on other sampling techniques. Discussing RDS under  conditions reasonably similar to ours, Teitler et al. (2003) stressed the need  to allocate data collection resources efficiently when searching for the hard 
to-reach; Link and Burks (2003) demonstrated that tailoring data collection  designs when contacting the hard-to-reach can help “increase participation and  reduce costs – or at least allow for more efficient use of a fixed pool of financial  resources.” 
On Recruiting Through Social Networking 
With the rise of social networking, researchers are realizing new ways of  contacting the hard-to-reach. Facebook’s potential as a medium to locate the  hard-to-reach was demonstrated in a 2015 Survey Practice article, “Facebook  as a tool for respondent tracing” (Schneider et al. 2015). Remarkably, the  authors noted that at the time of their article, over “160 million people in the  United States ha[d] Facebook accounts,” and unlike a person’s home address,  telephone number or email, those profiles are substantially stable over time  (Schneider et al. 2015). 
Using Facebook’s huge membership pool, those authors detailed the process  of contacting former foster care youth who had been randomly selected for a  longitudinal evaluation of a prior intervention. A major challenge of the survey  was locating the intended respondent, especially those who had “run away”  from home as their 18th birthday approached. After combing public records  failed, the researchers searched through Facebook by examining “individual  profiles for clues to the Facebook users’ identities,” such as birth date, high  school, and physical location. Eventually, the researchers were able to locate  and interview 20 of 33 (slightly over 60%) of the respondents searched through  Facebook (Schneider et al. 2015). 
From simple follow-up field interviews to respondent-driven sampling and  differential incentives, methods of contacting the hard-to-reach have evolved  and become more efficient. Today, given its enormous following, Facebook offers  researchers further opportunities to continue and expand this positive trend by  providing previously unimaginable and cost-effective ways of connecting with  hard-to-reach populations, whether for direct data collection or, as in our case,  recruitment of in-depth interviewees.
4 Marc D. Weiner et al. 
Recruitment Protocol and Outcomes 
For our qualitative project, we needed to locate and recruit 80 interview  respondents, divided evenly between men and women with nationwide geographic  dispersion, who experienced divorce at or over the age of 50. Our main concern  was that while currently approximately 25% of all divorces in America are gray,  the incidence rate is still nonetheless so low in the general national population as  to stymie traditional in-depth interviewing recruitment efforts. 
Our qualifying criteria for interviewees were as follows: 
(1) 50 years of age or older; 
(2) divorced, with the divorce (whether a first, second, or later divorce)  having taken place at or after the age of 50 or older; and  
(3) English-speaking. 
These restrictions meant that our targeted respondents were hard-to-identify  and hard-to-sample. Two standard methods of reaching this type of population  include screening surveys and recruitment advertising. The first method involves  using telephone or mail surveys to locate potential respondents. Screener  questionnaires are then employed to identify persons hidden within the general  population, but who qualify for the study (Teitler et al. 2003; Tourangeau  2014). As previously noted, due to the low incidence of this group in the general  population, surveys of any type were simply cost-prohibitive. 
We then investigated the possibility of advertising, for example, in The  AARP Magazine, but this option was both extremely expensive and would limit  exposure to those organizational members. We also researched using public  posters to recruit participants at locations across the country; that approach,  however, was rendered unmanageable under cost-constrained circumstances  by the fairly extensive coordination efforts required to properly locate and  maintain those notices. Once again, these measures proved impractical. 
We therefore sought out alternative forms of respondent recruitment, and  more specifically, began to examine social networking sites as vehicles for  identifying our target sample (Bhutta 2012; Rife et al. 2016; Schneider et al.  2015). Facebook, the obvious first choice, appeared promising in that we could  display our recruitment notice with relative efficiency to those users in our  desired geographic regions who met the age requirement for having experienced  a gray divorce. 
Indeed, the outcome well-exceeded our expectations: Over four waves that  together totaled 13 days, we were contacted by 178 presumptively qualified  respondents at an average cost of $1.18 per respondent, for a total recruitment  cost of $210.04. Broken down in further detail, this total cost reflects the  number of times the study advertisement is “clicked” multiplied by the “cost  per click.” The “cost per click” varies based on the selection criteria we used  to locate our sample. In this study, it ranged from $0.21 per click for the first  wave of data collection from both sexes, to $0.09 per click for the third wave 
The Utility of Facebook 5 
of men only. Summary statistics indicate that over the course of this study, our  advertisement was presented to 25,183 Facebook users who clicked a total of  1,325 times at a mean cost of $0.15852 per click (resulting in the total cost of  $210.04). 
Apparently in order to maintain a particular aesthetic, Facebook places  strict guidelines on the use of images in all advertisements (Figure 1). The key  restriction is that any image may only be 20% text, and Facebook provides a  grid tool to test potential advertisements for the text-image proportions. For  academic institutions or well-known products, this can be a limitation because  of the brand equity of the institutional or commercial logo. We therefore  developed two alternatives, one that is a “tight shot” of the informal Rutgers  University seal (Figure 2), and another that is a picture of a Rutgers University  monument sign on the flagship New Brunswick Campus (Figure 3). In both  
Figure 1 Facebook text rules.
  

6 Marc D. Weiner et al. 
Figure 2 Recruitment advertisement: informal university seal.
  

instances, these two images allowed us to represent Rutgers’ identity without  violating Facebook’s rules. 
The institutional seal-as-visual study advertisement was simple; the title  indicated the principal investigator’s institutional affiliation (Edward J. Bloustein  School of Planning and Public Policy, Rutgers University), and showed the  Bloustein School logo and date. The ad displayed the Rutgers University shield  as the central visual element reading, above the visual, “Rutgers Professor seeks  volunteers for study on divorce experienced at age 50 or older” and below  the visual, “If you had a divorce at or after 50 years old, and would like to  participate in this interesting academic study, please click the link to learn more  about the project” (Figure 2). Similarly, the monument sign study advertisement  contained the exact same narrative, only with a classic Rutgers University  monument sign substituted as the central visual element (Figure 3). 
The Utility of Facebook 7 
Figure 3 Recruitment advertisement: university monument sign.
  

If a potential respondent clicked through the advertisement, she or he saw  the following text on the first page of the online screener questionnaire: 
My name is Jocelyn Elise Crowley, and I am a Professor of Public Policy  at the Edward J. Bloustein School of Planning and Public Policy at  Rutgers, The State University of New Jersey. Thank you for your interest  in participating in this study. I am studying the experiences of women  and men who divorced at or after the age of 50. To do so, I am asking  for volunteers, who divorced at or after the age of 50, to participate with  me in a one-hour telephone interview. This project is fully confidential,  and has been approved by the Rutgers University Institutional Review  Board. Confidential means you will not be identified in any resulting  publications or reports that come from my research and that no one will  ever know that you participated. However, to schedule your interview  
8 Marc D. Weiner et al. 
at a convenient time for you, I will need to contact you. So that I can do  so, kindly provide the following information. 
To screen for study qualification, potential respondents were then asked,  “Did you divorce when you were 50 years of age or older?” Those who  answered negatively were thanked for their interest, advised they did not  meet the criteria for participation, and exited from the process. From those  answering affirmatively, we collected their self-reported first and last names,  sex, preferred email address, telephone numbers, and preferences regarding  time and day of the week for the one-hour interview. They were then advised  that the researcher would be contacting them over the next few weeks to  schedule an interview.  
After performing a second, confirmatory screening review, and taking into  account dropouts and/or other failures to qualify, 167 of the original 178  presumptively qualified respondents constituted the final recruited sample. We  then interviewed 80 of these qualified respondents. 
Between July 23, 2014, and February 9, 2015, we collected four waves  of data; we used waves for two primary reasons: First, we could constrain  the number of “fresh” contacts at any given time so that the primary  investigator could contact and interview respondents in a timely fashion.  Second, we initially believed that we only needed 60 interviews, 30 with  men and 30 with women. However, after that number of interviews, we had  not reached data saturation, i.e., we were still learning new content from  our respondents about their divorce experiences (Hennink et al. 2011). We  therefore conducted two more waves of data collection, of which wave 3 was  men only, and wave 4 women only, bringing us to a total of 80 interviews  (40 of each sex). 
Table 1 describes the disposition of each recruitment wave. Moreover, since  Facebook reaches all across the United States (if not the globe), we were able to  reach qualifying respondents across a wide variety of locations (Figure 4). 
Table 1 Outcomes of Facebook recruiting effort. 
Wave 1 7/23 to  7/28/14 
Wave 2 8/19 to  8/21/14 
Wave 3 1/5 to  1/6/15 
Wave 4 2/6 to  2/7/15 
Totals 
Male Female Male Female Male only Female only Male Female 
Names collected 21 38 6 34 46 22 73 94 Interviews completed 12 21 5 9 23 10 40 40 Incomplete: not qualified 2 1 2 0 5 Incomplete: no response 20 8 13 4 45 Incomplete: no show 1 0 1 1 3 Incomplete: declined 3 0 0 1 4 Incomplete: not available 0 0 1 0 1 Incomplete: bad contact info 0 0 1 0 1 Incomplete: excess, unused 0 17 females 5 males 6 females 5 23
The Utility of Facebook 9 
Figure 4 Geographic distribution of qualified Facebook recruited respondents.  
Limitations and Extensions 
This protocol is highly adaptable to a wide variety of recruitment circumstances  beyond in-depth interviewees, including focus group recruitment, message and/ or question pretesting, and nonprobability surveys. While the implications for  researchers seeking hard-to-reach/hard-to-contact populations are profound,  the approach is not without limitations. 
One potential limitation is that Facebook allows respondents to engage with  our advertisement content by sharing the recruitment notice with “Facebook  friends” and connections online. While this may be favorable, resulting a second level de facto form of respondent-driven sampling, it may also be undesirable  in that some intra-Facebook-user communications may unfavorable to, or may  undermine the purpose of, the advertisement. While it does not appear that this  limitation affected our effort, it is worth noting. 
Another, more specific limitation is raised by the “basic question about the  effect of recruitment process on … representativeness” (Belson 1960). While  our qualitative study made no probability-sample-backed effort to generalize  to the national population of gray divorcees, we were concerned with the  potential for recruitment bias. Our simple-but-effective effort to address  recruitment bias centered on gathering more than twice the required number  of interviews and, within the larger set of recruited potential respondents,  balancing the interviewed sample, as best as possible, on our selection  criteria. Still, and with Belson’s caution in mind, recruitment bias is the most  prominent limitation of this approach, taking two forms. The first is akin to  
10 Marc D. Weiner et al. 
sampling population undercoverage, i.e., that non-Facebook users cannot be  contacted through this method; the second, endemic in virtually all sampling  approaches, is self-selection bias: to be sure, “self-selection bias is possible  even if the research has used random sampling techniques” (Costigan and  Cox 2001). 
To illustrate the undercoverage issue, out of the general U.S. population  as of January 2017 there were 32.3 million Facebook users in the 45–54 year  old age range; 14.1 in the 55–64 range, and 20.2 in the 65 and over range,  aggregating to 66.6 million Facebook users in the 45 and over group (Statista  2017). The Census Bureau projected that group, at July 2017, to include 142.7  million persons1 (U.S. Census 2014); the implication is that approximately  53% of that age group could not have been reached through Facebook-based  recruiting alone.  
Another potential limitation is self-selection bias, which is typically a  function of a relationship between the subject matter of a study (as reflected  in the content of the recruitment approach) and the interests and motivations  of a potential respondent. It is a core principle of sampling and bias analysis  that if “selection is correlated with respondent characteristics in variables  important to the study, it can undermine the representative nature and bias  the sample on which estimates are based” (Shapiro-Luft and Capella 2013).  Moreover, “the sample selection process under nonprobability sampling is  subjective, which does not guarantee the elimination of selection biases” (Lee  2009).  
Given the research design and core questions for our study, we were not  concerned about this potential bias, largely because the subject matter was  not related to the propensity to be a Facebook user (Dennis 2010). However,  other qualitative studies, particularly those involving Internet and social media  use, sociability, communication propensity, and the like, are advised to explore  the possibility of self-selection bias at the time they design their recruitment  protocol. 
One suggestion to reduce Facebook sampling self-selection bias, which would  not have been practical in our hard-to-reach and hard-to-contact circumstances,  is to omit the selection criteria from the recruitment notice (Springer et al. 2016).  Still, we note that prior research studying divorcing couples, albeit not based on  Internet recruiting, found that men who participate “are more invested in their  fathering role” (Costigan and Cox (2001) citing Boyd (1985); for a quantitative  perspective, see “Assessing and compensating for self-selection bias (non 
representativeness) of the family research sample,” Braver and Bay (1992)).  Applying this observation to our study suggests that those with more extreme  experiences – both positive and negative – may have had a greater propensity to  respond to the recruitment notice. This concern was addressed in our project’s  substantive analysis by balancing the use of interviews from respondents with  different gray divorce experiences (Crowley forthcoming, 2018). 
1 The July 1, 2017 data point is estimated as the mean of the resident populations for both sexes  for July 1, 2015 and July 1, 2020.
The Utility of Facebook 11 
This recruitment protocol need not be a replacement alternative to traditional  sampling approaches but could be deployed as part of a dual frame to reduce  the costs of traditional methods, such as telephone recruitment; moreover,  traditional methods may still be needed to ensure a representative sample on the  variables of interest.2 Such efforts may take many forms, including combining  recruitment with outreach to community groups, with print advertising in  media of interest to the hard-to-reach/hard-to-contact population, as well as  with telephone recruitment based on zip codes in which the target hard-to 
reach/hard-to-contact population is concentrated (Willis 2015). Qualitative researchers would be well advised, particularly in nonprobability  sampling, to study the impact of the limitations we have noted. Useful additional  research could include comparisons of probability-based to nonprobability  sampling methods within the same research protocol, coding assessment of  substantive outcomes based on different recruitment methods for the same  research question, and similar comparative techniques that vary recruitment  approaches while controlling for other aspects of the study. 
Conclusion 
We have detailed an easy and cost-efficient approach to recruiting for qualitative  in-depth interviewees from a hard-to-reach and hard-to-contact population, which  easily permits stratification by geography and gender. While this recruitment  method is not immune to the potential limitations inherent in all sampling  approaches, social media recruiting in general – and Facebook in particular – is  applicable to a wide variety of research contexts and represents nothing less than  a change in ease, speed, and economic efficiency in this practice area. 
Acknowledgements 
This work and the underlying qualitative research project were supported by  Rutgers University’s Edward J. Bloustein School of Planning and Public Policy’s  Michael J. and Susan Angelides Public Policy Research Fund. M.B. Crowley,  M. Patrick Simon, and K. T. G. Weiner-Simon provided ongoing support and  encouragement. 
References 
Belson, W.A. 1960. Volunteer bias in test-room groups. Public Opinion  Quarterly 24(1): 115–126. 
Bhutta, C.B. 2012. Not by the book: Facebook as a sampling frame. Sociological  Methods and Research 41(1): 57–88. 
2 We are grateful to an anonymous reviewer for these points.
12 Marc D. Weiner et al. 
Boyd, S.T. 1985. Study of the father. American Behavioral Scientist 29(1):  112–128. 
Braver, S.L. and R.C. Bay. 1992. Assessing and compensating for self-selection  bias (non-representativeness) of the family research sample. Journal of  Marriage and Family 54(4): 925–939. 
Costigan, C.L. and M.J. Cox. 2001. Fathers’ participation in family research:  is there a self-selection bias? Journal of Family Psychology 15(4): 706–720. Crowley, J.E. forthcoming, 2018. Gray divorce: what we lose and gain from  
mid-life splits. Berkeley, CA, University of California Press.  Dennis, J.M. 2010. KnowledgePanel: processes & procedures contributing to  sample representativeness & tests for self-selection bias. Knowledge Networks  Research Note. Available at http://www.knowledgenetworks.com/ganp/docs/ KnowledgePanelR-Statistical-Methods-Note.pdf. 
Faugier, J. and M. Sargeant. 1997. Sampling hard to reach populations. Journal  of Advanced Nursing 26(4): 790–797. 
Hennink, M., I. Hutter and A. Bailey. 2011. Qualitative research methods.  Sage, Thousand Oaks, CA. 
Lee, S. 2009. Understanding respondent driven sampling from a total survey  error perspective. Survey Practice 2(6): 1–6. 
Link, M.W. and A.T. Burks. 2013. Leveraging auxiliary data, differential  incentives, and survey mode to target hard-to-reach groups in an address based sample design. Public Opinion Quarterly 77(3): 696–713. 
Lundberg, G.A. and O. Larsen. 1949. Characteristics of hard-to-reach  individuals in field surveys. Public Opinion Quarterly 13(3): 487–494. Rife, S.C., K.L. Cate, M. Kosinski and D. Stillwell. 2016. Participant recruitment  and data collection through Facebook: the role of personality factors.  International Journal of Social Research Methodology 19(1): 69–83. Schneider, S., A. Burke-Garcia and G. Thomas. 2015. Facebook as a tool for  respondent tracing. Survey Practice 8(1): 1–6. 
Shapiro-Luft, D. and J.N. Cappella. 2013. Video content in web surveys:  effects on selection bias and validity. Public Opinion Quarterly 77(4):  936–961. 
Springer, V.A., P.J. Martini, S.C. Lindsey and I.S. Vezich. 2016. Practice-based  considerations for using multi-stage survey design to reach special populations  on Amazon’s Mechanical Turk. Survey Practice 9(5): 1–8. 
Statista: The Statistics Portal. 2017. Facebook users by age in the U.S. 2017.  Available at https://www.statista.com/statistics/398136/us-facebook-user age-groups/. 
Teitler, J.O., N.E. Reichman and S. Sprachman. 2003. Costs and benefits of  improving response rates for a hard-to-reach population. Public Opinion  Quarterly 67(1): 126–138. 
Tourangeau, R. 2014. Defining hard-to-survey populations. In: (R. Tourangeau,  B. Edwards, T.P. Johnson, K.M. Wolter and N. Bates, eds.) Hard-to-survey  populations. Cambridge University Press, Cambridge, UK. 
The Utility of Facebook 13 
U.S. Census Bureau, Population Division. 2014. U.S. Census: Table 3. Projections  of the population by sex and selected age groups for the United States: 2015  to 2060” (NP2014-T3). 
Willis, G.B. 2015. Research synthesis: the practice of cross-cultural cognitive  interviewing. Public Opinion Quarterly 79(S1): 359–395.