Article 
Using Facebook for Academic Purposes: Current Literature and Directions for Future Research 
Lian Niu1 
Abstract 
Journal of Educational Computing Research 
2019, Vol. 56(8) 1384–1406 ! The Author(s) 2017 
Article reuse guidelines: 
sagepub.com/journals-permissions DOI: 10.1177/0735633117745161 journals.sagepub.com/home/jec 
This study reviews the international literature on using Facebook for academic pur poses to examine whether and how this popular social networking site contributes to teaching and learning in formal education. A review of 57 empirical studies on this topic suggest that (a) the majority of studies report positive effects or feedback of using Facebook for academic purposes, and recommend its integration into teaching and learning; (b) Facebook is shown to be effective as a platform for academic communication and effective in promoting student-centered learning; (c) the effects of Facebook used as Learning Management System are mixed and under-studied; (d) the quality of Facebook-related learning process and learning outcomes is under-studied; (e) Facebook may not be suitable for teaching in all disciplines; and (f) studies heavily rely on preexperimental design and self-reported data, which raises the issue of response bias. It is recommended that future research should (a) focus more on in-depth examination of the process and quality of learning using Facebook, (b) adopt quasi- or true experimental design to control for confounding factors, (c) properly address potential response bias by minimizing the relationship between researcher and students, and (d) more frequently adopt content analysis to reduce reliance on self-reported data. 
Keywords 
Facebook, Learning Management System, online learning, student-centered learning 
1University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill, NC, USA 
Corresponding Author: 
Lian Niu, University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill, 207 Bynum Hall, Chapel Hill, NC 27599, USA. Email: Lian.niu09@gmail.com
Niu 1385
Introduction 
Social networking sites have become ubiquitous, especially among the youth (Lenhart, 2015). There has been abundant research on the implication of Web 2.0 technologies including social networking sites, especially on young people’s health, socialization, psychology, and education outcomes (Loader, Vromen, & Xenos, 2014; McHaney, 2011; O’Keeffe, Clarke-Pearson, & Council on Communications and Media, 2011; Valenzuela, Arriagada, & Scherman, 2012). Despite concerns about whether social networking sites have become an unwelcome distraction for students and whether they negatively affect stu dents’ academic achievement (Ivala & Gachago, 2012; Jacobsen & Forste, 2011), educators are eager to understand how this fundamental shift in students’ com munication method might as well present an opportunity for teachers to design innovative instructions to enhance student learning. Efforts to integrate social networking sites into teaching and learning and to understand students’ willing ness to participate have significantly increased. 
It has been argued that effective learning environments promote learner centered, knowledge centered, assessment-centered, and community-centered learning (Bransford, Brown, & Cocking, 1999). Online learning environments, such as Facebook, provide access to educational experiences that are more flex ible in time and space than classroom teaching and learning. In order to suc cessfully utilize online learning environments, educators should not only take advantage of the enhanced capacity of content distribution provided by online learning platforms, but also emphasize the role of interaction, including student– student, student–teacher, student–content, teacher–teacher, teacher–content, and content–content interaction (Anderson, 2004). The critical roles of connec tion, interaction, and participation have been emphasized by numerous online learning theories. Based on social presence theory, it has been argued that online learners are able to project themselves online and be perceived as being real and present (Lowenthal, 2010). Online learner participation is a process of maintain ing relations with others and is supported by engaging activities, making par ticipation and learning inseparable (Hrastinski, 2009). The learning process increasingly involves informal learning, and technology reshapes thinking. Traditional learning theories, including behaviorism, cognitivism, and construct ivism, become limited in the capacity of explaining learning activities such as online learning. Alternative theories such as connectivism attempt to fill such gap by taking into account the evolved learning process, which not only occurs within individuals, but also occurs within environments of shifting elements (Siemens, 2005). Social media brings two-way conversations to classrooms and by doing so decentralizes control over the learning and teaching process (Barczyk & Duncan, 2012). Facebook, as the most popular social networking service, has received much attention by educators and researchers. The high popularity of Facebook has made it a top choice for educators interested in 
1386 Journal of Educational Computing Research 56(8)
utilizing social networking sites for teaching, and has been transforming the way students are taught (Shaltry, Henriksen, Wu, & Dickson, 2013). Facebook pro vides students with enhanced authority in the learning process by giving them more control over the frequency and depth of learning-related communication. It also provides both teacher and students with an additional platform for teaching and learning, extending the classroom experience in terms of both time and space (Shiu, Fong, & Lam, 2010). Education researchers have pointed out not only a need for enhanced utilization of Facebook in classrooms, but also the need for a better understanding of how this social media site can be inte grated into teaching to ensure both teachers and students feel comfortable about it (Fewkes & McCabe, 2012). This review sets out to summarize the current research literature on the usage of Facebook for academic purposes. The goal is to examine studies’ findings about the effectiveness and challenges of integrat ing Facebook into teaching and learning, to reveal whether the research design and methodology of the studies support the validity of such findings, and to provide suggestions for future research and practices. 
The review is organized as follows. First, the methodology of literature search and selection is presented. Findings are then organized separately for substantive and methodological aspects of reviewed studies. The Discussion section focuses on the implications of the findings and provides suggestions for future research and practices. 
Methodology 
The search for relevant research literature was limited to studies written in English and published in peer-reviewed journals or conference proceedings. As the emergence of social networking sites is a relatively new phenomenon itself, no time limit was established for the literature search. The online databases searched included EBSCO, ERIC, Web of Science, Scopus, and Google Scholar. The following search terms were used: Facebook, school, college. The search terms were used to search anywhere in the document. The logical relationship between the search terms was Facebook AND (school OR college). Studies were included if (a) the study was empirical research; (b) the study focused on Facebook, not other social media sites; and (c) the topic was about using Facebook for academic purposes or opinions about using Facebook for academic purposes. For this study, Facebook being used for ‘‘academic purposes’’ was defined as when students ‘‘commonly and organically use[d] Facebook as an informal academic tool to work with each other to organ ize class projects or exchange information about coursework,’’ or when faculty formally brought Facebook ‘‘into their classes in various ways’’ such as to pro vide class-related information, to be used as a class discussion board, or to encourage student interaction (Gettman & Cortijo, 2015, p. 1). It was defined that when Facebook was intentionally used for the purpose of learning and 
Niu 1387
teaching within the context of educational institutions, instead of for the pur pose of social interaction, it was being used for academic purposes. Such usage of Facebook could be initiated by instructors or students or both, and could take various forms. The search and selection process yielded a total of 57 research articles (Appendix A). 
The research topics of the included studies can be categorized into four groups. The majority of the studies examined Facebook as a teaching or learning tool. In these studies, Facebook was utilized for a wide range of roles, including as learning environment (Akbari, Pilot, & Simons, 2015; Shih, 2011), as discus sion platform (Kent, 2013; Lin, Hou, Wu, & Chang, 2014), as course extension (Dzvapatsva, Mitrovic, & Dietrich, 2014; English & Duncan-Howell, 2008), as information channel for learning (Mena et al., 2012; Omar, Embi, & Yunus, 2012), as Learning Management System (LMS; LaRue, 2012; Meishar-Tal, Kurtz, & Pieterse, 2012), and as a tool for faculty–student interaction (Gettman & Cortijo, 2015; Hamid, Waycott, Kurnia, & Chang, 2015). A smaller number of studies examined students or teachers’ perception of using Facebook for academic purposes (Bruneel, De Wit, Verhoeven, & Elen, 2013; Sa´nchez, Cortijo, & Javed, 2014). A third group of studies examined the relation between using Facebook and students’ learning outcomes (Kabre, 2011; Lambic´, 2016; Michikyan, Subrahmanyam, & Dennis, 2015). Finally, a few studies focused on students’ use of Facebook on their own initiative for various purposes including academic ones (Lampe, Wohn, Vitak, Ellison, & Wash, 2011; Selwyn, 2009). Research methods of the studies include qualitative, quantitative, and mixed methods, each making up approximately one-third of the studies (39%, 26%, 35%, respectively). Forty-one percent of the studies utilized samples of 100 or fewer participants. 
Results 
More than half of the studies are experimental, examining the effects of using Facebook as an instructional and learning tool designed by the instructor/ researcher. In these studies, oftentimes the instructor designed the experiment, and studied the effect of the treatment (usage of Facebook). As a result, the experiment participants and the researcher tended to know each other well in these studies. Of the included studies, 42% are survey studies, which are descrip tive and observational. In these studies, the research focus is mainly on students’ experiences in, willingness to, perception of, and capacity in using Facebook for learning purposes. The participants and the researcher oftentimes do not know each other. An overview of the included studies suggests that the majority of the researchers drew positive conclusions about using Facebook for academic pur poses, and recommended that Facebook be integrated into the teaching and learning process. In this section, the substantive findings are summarized, fol lowed by an analysis of the methodological characteristics of the studies. 
1388 Journal of Educational Computing Research 56(8)
Substantive Findings 
Academic communication. Findings of the reviewed studies suggest that the most common positive effect of using Facebook for academic purposes is the enhancement of interaction among students and between students and instruc tors. Sa´nchez et al. (2014) surveyed 214 college students about their perception of using Facebook for academic purposes, and found that most students believed that Facebook would provide opportunity for communication and col laboration with classmates. By interviewing 55 college students and five faculty members on using Facebook for teaching and learning, Bosch (2009) revealed that students found Facebook to be useful in creating connections to other students, in sharing information with each other, and in making faculty more approachable, and that Facebook was efficient for faculty to distribute infor mation. Using content analysis of students’ posts in a Facebook group for a college course, Bowman and Akcaoglu (2014) found that students who joined the Facebook course group mainly used it to discuss exam-related content and enjoyed being involved in the discussion. Using course grade comparison and survey of 45 students, Dzvapatsva et al. (2014) found that students using Facebook for course learning indicated increased contact time with classmates and instructors and scored higher than previous cohort not using Facebook as a learning tool. 
Building community and promoting sense of belonging within class are also commonly reported positive effects of using Facebook for academic purposes. English and Duncan-Howell (2008) found that a Facebook course group for college students promoted students’ affective communication such as encourage ment, group reinforcement, and sense of community within the class. Focus group sessions with 46 college students revealed that students using social tech nologies including Facebook reported enhanced interaction with both class mates and instructors, enhanced peer learning, growth in critical thinking skills because of the opportunity to comment on others’ posts, self-monitoring of learning process and self-directed learning, and overall enjoyable learning environment (Hamid et al., 2015). Using statistical and content analysis of stu dents’ Facebook posts, Razak, Saeed, and Ahmad (2013) found that using Facebook as a learning environment for English writing increased learner– learner and learner–instructor interaction, information sharing, and students’ sense of belonging. Rasiah (2014) analyzed Facebook posts of 122 students and concluded that Facebook encouraged students to collaborate effectively with their peers and with faculty. Omar et al. (2012) also reported positive feedback from students about Facebook’s effectiveness as a platform for infor mation-sharing tasks. Madge, Meek, Wellens, and Hooley (2009) found that Facebook usage helped new students settle into the university environment and created a sense of community for students. Similar results are also reported in studies by Meishar-Tal, Kurtz, and Pieterse (2012) and Kent (2013). 
Niu 1389
It can be seen that the abovementioned positive effects of Facebook are rooted in Facebook’s social functions. Community building and stronger sense of belonging, enhanced interaction among students and instructors, increased contact time with class materials and classmates, better collaboration, more effective information sharing, and emotional support within the course or the cohort are all directly related to Facebook’s capacity to connect users. The educational usage of Facebook both on students’ own initiative and facilitated by instructors appear to focus on the strength of Facebook as a platform to extend and enhance interactions among learners and instructors and to increase the effective flow of information (Hsu & Yen, 2012; Hurt et al., 2012; Lim & Ismail, 2010). Students have been found to be willing to use Facebook as a channel of information for learning purposes (Mena et al., 2012), and students’ own learning-related usage of Facebook is primarily for maintaining strong links between people within a learning unit (Selwyn, 2009). Among the three under lying dimensions of educational usage of Facebook, namely communication, collaboration, and information sharing, promoting collaboration within academic groups is argued to be the most important educational value of the social networking site (Manasijevic´, Zˇivkovic´, Arsic´, & Milosˇevic´, 2016). The educational value of Facebook in this sense can be summarized as academic socializing, which is in essence enhanced communication. Not surprisingly, Facebook being a social networking site is especially suitable as a course or student cohort platform for academic socializing as suggested by the aforemen tioned studies. 
Suitability as Learning Management System. A total of 35 studies, or about 92% of the reviewed studies that focused on using Facebook as a teaching/learning tool, utilized Facebook for its socializing capacity. Only three studies utilized Facebook as an LMS. LaRue (2012) examined the effect of using Facebook as the sole classroom management tool for a nursing course. It is concluded that Facebook proved to be an effective platform for a hybrid in-person/online course. Similarly, Meishar-Tal et al. (2012) used Facebook as an alternative to an LMS with a group of 50 college students. While the feedback from students was positive, the main contribution of Facebook as reported by students was its capacity in promoting interaction among students and instructors. Wang, Woo, Quek, Yang, and Liu (2012) used Facebook as an LMS with 31 students, and reported mixed findings. Students were basically satisfied with using Facebook group for fundamental functions of an LMS. However, students did not like that Facebook lacked the capacity for files of different formats to be uploaded, or that online discussion in Facebook group was not organized in a threaded struc ture which would allow for easy searching and reviewing. These findings echo those revealed by Gray, Annabell, and Kennedy (2010) and Barrot (2016). Students also expressed concerns about their privacy being compromised using a social networking site for course purposes. These findings clearly show 
1390 Journal of Educational Computing Research 56(8)
that Facebook is not designed as an LMS, and it has certain limitations in fully meeting the formal learning needs of students. Wang et al. (2012) concluded that Facebook can be used as an LMS substitute when commercial LMS is not affordable, and should be used as a supplement to LMS when commercial ones designed specifically for learning are available. It may be tempting for educators to adopt Facebook where commercial management systems are not available. However, the abovementioned findings also suggest caution to be used when adopting Facebook as an LMS, especially as a substitute. More empirical research is needed to examine the suitability of Facebook as a substitute for LMS in formal learning contexts. 
Student-centered learning and learning quality. In addition to promoting interaction, communication, and collaboration among students and instructors, Facebook has also been shown to promote student-centered learning, although by only a few studies. LaRue’s (2012) study shows that by utilizing Facebook in teaching, the instructor became the facilitator of the course, and students became the producers of information instead of only consumers of knowledge. Hamid et al. (2015) reported students’ self-directed learning and self-monitoring of the learning progress while using Facebook as a tool for student–student and student–lecturer interactions. Meishar-Tal et al. (2012) found that using Facebook group contributed to students’ usage of personal learning style. These findings echo arguments that Web 2.0 technologies can be used to improve learner motivation and encourage self-empowered learners (Wankel & Blessinger, 2013). It appears that using Facebook for learning provides stu dents with a platform where more autonomy is available, encouraging students to take more responsibility for their own learning process. 
While studies have attributed increased student-centered learning to the usage of Facebook as a teaching/learning tool, some researchers have also expressed concerns about the quality of learning related to Facebook usage. Lin et al. (2014) examined students’ cognitive processing patterns in a collaborative pro blem-solving teaching activity that integrated Facebook as a discussion tool and a simulation-based teaching software. Results of their study suggest that while ‘‘diverse and continuous cognitive processes were observed in discussions in which higher-level cognitive phases such as application and analysis were demonstrated’’ (Lin et al., 2014, p. 55), student groups that focused on using manipulation (simulation-based teaching software) to find optimal solution demonstrated a greater depth of cognitive processing than those who focused on the development of procedures and solutions through discussions only. In addition, students focusing on using discussion to find solutions had more off topic discussions than those who focused on using manipulation to learn. These findings suggest that Facebook as an effective platform for interaction and com munication does not always deliver optimal quality of learning outcomes, espe cially when the teaching content requires learning by doing. Gray et al. (2010) 
Niu 1391
surveyed 759 medical students about their usage of Facebook as a supplemen tary learning tool to develop medical knowledge and skills. They found that students’ use of Facebook was conservative. Although Facebook provided a platform to build learning networks beyond their university, students** neither did so. Nor did students utilize the more innovative tools of Facebook, such as user-developed apps. While the authors did not discuss why Facebook was not utilized to the fullest, it does appear that the Facebook-related learning out comes were not optimal and could be further enhanced. 
Suitability for academic purposes by discipline. As discussed earlier, creating a plat form for connection with each other in the teaching and learning process is a significant educational value of Facebook. As a result, Facebook is especially suitable as a teaching/learning tool where the content and learning objectives require much discussion and collaboration among the learners. This is demon strated by the wide usage of Facebook in the teaching of English as a second language (ESL), where communication is an intrinsic part of the learning pro cess. A total of 11 studies, or almost 20% of the studies reviewed here, utilized Facebook for the teaching and learning of English as a second language. Yusof, Manan, and Alias (2012) examined the effect of using Facebook Notes as the medium of providing peer feedback with a group of 20 ESL students, and found that the comments and suggestions posted on Facebook by students were useful in helping peers improve in English writing. Similar results have also been reported by Shih (2011) and Wichadee (2013). Yen, Hou, and Chang (2015) integrated Facebook and Skype as platforms for students to perform role playing–based learning activities. The authors found that the learning tools allowed learners to learn actively, had positive effects on learner’s motivation, and reduced learners’ anxiety levels. It is concluded that the combination of role playing activity and the Facebook platform was an effective ESL teaching strat egy. Barrot (2016) used Facebook-based e-portfolio with students of ESL writing, and reported positive impact on the collecting, storing, and managing of students’ written outputs. Akbari et al. (2015) compared the learning out comes of 20 students learning English face-to-face and 20 students learning English using Facebook. They found that the Facebook group scored higher both in English and in autonomy, competence, and relatedness; moreover, stu dents learning English using Facebook formed a community of learning, and continued to communicate and interact with each other long after the course completed. 
While numerous studies in language education suggest that Facebook could serve as an effective teaching/learning tool, evidence from teaching in other discipline suggests otherwise. The study by Lin et al. (2014) focused on teaching in information management and on students’ learning gains in network trouble shooting abilities. As discussed earlier, their comparison of learning mainly through discussion and learning mainly through manipulation showed that for 
1392 Journal of Educational Computing Research 56(8)
the course Introduction to the Network, using simulation-based teaching software to conduct manipulation yielded higher level cognitive processing than mainly using Facebook to conduct discussion about the task at hand. Although both groups of students showed gains in network troubleshooting skills, the disad vantage of using Facebook and its communication capacity in this scenario is clear. 
The need for boundary between social and academic usage of Facebook. While numer ous studies have reported positive effects of Facebook usage for teaching and learning initiated and designed by instructors, mixed results have emerged in studies focusing on students’ willingness and own initiative to utilize Facebook for academic purposes. Some students believe that Facebook may have the potential to be used as a learning tool; still many students use Facebook mainly for social purposes and would like to draw a boundary between social and academic usage of the social networking site. 
Bruneel et al. (2013) conducted survey and interview with college students in Belgium to understand their willingness to use Facebook for educational pur poses. Not surprisingly, students mainly used Facebook for social purposes and leisure activities. The authors found that while students did not generally oppose the usage of Facebook for learning purposes, they did have difficulties perceiving Facebook as a learning tool, and they made a clear distinction between using Facebook for learning and social purposes. Similarly, a survey of 214 students in Spain reveals that the majority of students would not mind using Facebook as a learning tool, although their most important purpose of Facebook usage is social relations (Sa´nchez et al. 2014). Surveys of students in Romania (Grosseck, Bran, & Tiru, 2011) and the United Kingdom (Madge et al., 2009) also suggest that although students may have academics-related communication on Facebook, their purpose of using Facebook is always social in nature. Such social connection may in turn positively influence students’ academic perform ance; however, it is not students’ initiative to purposefully utilize Facebook for learning. 
Students’ need for a clear boundary between social and learning activities using Facebook is also detected by an online survey of Facebook users (mostly students) conducted by researchers from Hong Kong (Cheung, Chiu, & Lee, 2011). Their survey results suggest that social presence and group norms are the main influencing factors of Facebook usage, and social communication is the main activity on Facebook. Gettman and Cortijo (2015) examined students’ acceptance of using Facebook for academic purposes through a survey of 245 students. They found that students generally did not welcome the idea of using Facebook for academic purposes because they believed Facebook to be a social medium instead of an academic tool, and because they felt uncomfortable inter acting with instructors on Facebook. Students were especially resistant to usage of Facebook for academic purposes initiated by instructors, and the more 
Niu 1393
instructors were involved, the less comfortable they felt (Gettman & Cortijo, 2015). Even when students do actively involve in learning activities on Facebook following the guidance of instructors and feel positive about the enhanced peer learning and extended learning material made available by the Facebook learn ing platform, some still feel that the blurring of the boundary between studying and socializing on Facebook forms a distraction from both individual and group learning (Barrot, 2016; Gray et al., 2010). 
Methodological Characteristics 
Diversity of research methods. The reviewed studies have adopted diverse research designs and research methods. The majority of the reviewed studies are experi mental studies (56%), where the researchers/instructors designed experiments of using Facebook for academic purposes and examined the effects. Of the studies, 42% are survey/observational studies, where researchers collected information from students and teachers about their perception of, attitude toward, and actual usage of Facebook for various purposes. Qualitative method is used in about three quarters of all studies (74%) through either pure qualitative design (39%) or mixed method design (35%). Quantitative method is used in about 61% of all studies through either pure quantitative design (26%) or mixed method design (35%). It is noteworthy that multiple data collection and data analysis methods tend to be used within the same study, including individual interview, focus group, survey, content analysis, descriptive statistics, and infer ential statistics. For example, in an experimental study on the effectiveness of an optional Facebook activity for 128 pharmaceutical students, Cain and Policastri (2011) used inferential statistical method to compare students’ test scores, and used qualitative data collected from student survey and focus group sessions to evaluate students’ engagement and feedback. Kirschner and Karpinski (2010) surveyed 209 students to collect both quantitative and qualitative data on the relation between using Facebook when studying and academic performance. Michikyan et al. (2015) surveyed 261 students to examine the relation between online academic disclosure using Facebook and academic performance, and used both path analysis to examine survey data and content analysis to reveal patterns in students’ Facebook posts. The adoption of multiple data collection and data analysis methods provides enriched information source and the com bination of quantitative and qualitative data portraits the usage and effective ness of Facebook more comprehensively. 
Reliance on preexperimental design. Despite the diversity in data collection and analysis methods, it is noteworthy that most experimental studies relied on preexperimental design. Out of a total of 32 experimental studies reviewed here, 24 adopted preexperimental design (75%), six adopted quasi-experimental design (19%), and two adopted true experimental design (6%). Because of the 
1394 Journal of Educational Computing Research 56(8)
lack of control group and random assignment, preexperimental designs such as one-shot case study and one-group pretest–posttest design are the least powerful experimental designs and are the most vulnerable to internal validity threats (Campbell & Stanley, 1963). Nineteen of the reviewed studies adopted one shot case study design, where the usage of Facebook for learning was introduced to a group of students, and its effectiveness and students’ perception were exam ined. Five studies adopted one-group pretest–posttest design, where learning outcomes or perceptions were compared before and after the introduction of Facebook as a teaching/learning tool. As many factors could have confounded with the effect of Facebook usage, it is difficult to determine whether observed learning outcomes should be attributed to the adoption of Facebook. Nevertheless, studies have drawn causal conclusion between Facebook usage and learning outcomes based on findings of preexperimental designs. For exam ple, Petrovic´, Petrovic´, Jeremic´, Milenkovic´, and C´ irovic´ (2012) encouraged stu dents to create and moderate Facebook groups focusing on environmental issues, and surveyed 68 students about their usage of Facebook and learning gains. It is concluded that Facebook contributed to students’ achievement level, although no confounding variable was controlled for. The perceived learning gains may not be the result of Facebook group discussions, but could be because of or partly because of other formats of communication and learning activities. Without a control group, the effect of the treatment cannot be easily determined. The heavy reliance on preexperimental designs in experimental studies on Facebook’s educational value could compromise the validity of the conclusions. 
Using self-selected control group is another issue that warrants attention. Some studies did adopt control group; however, the assignment of treatment was not random and the treatment group and control group were not equivalent. The most common research design of this type is when researchers let students decide themselves whether or not to participate in using Facebook as a learning tool. As the participating and nonparticipating groups are not equivalent, any detected difference in learning outcomes is not necessarily attributable to usage of Facebook for learning. Bowman and Akcaoglu (2014) let students decide about participation in Facebook course group, and concluded that Facebook participants had higher grades than nonparticipants. The validity of such con clusion, however, is subject to closer examination and should be taken with caution. 
Self-reported data and response bias. The dominant conclusion of the experimental studies regarding using Facebook for academic purposes is that Facebook proves to be an effective tool in formal teaching and learning contexts, has generated positive feedback from students and led to desirable learning gains compared with traditional teaching methods, and should be further integrated in curriculum design (e.g., Cain & Policastri, 2011; Hurt et al., 2012). Survey studies, however, have suggested that students’ attitude toward using 
Niu 1395
Facebook for educational purposes is not as enthusiastic (Bruneel et al., 2013; Gettman & Cortijo, 2015; Roblyer, McDaniel, Webb, Herman, & Witty, 2010). Students clearly do not want the boundary between their online social life and academic activities to be blurred, which has captured the attention of a few authors of experimental studies as well (Barrot, 2016; Gray et al., 2010). There seems to be an inconsistency between the positive feedback from and attitude of students using Facebook for learning purposes reported in the experi mental studies and the neutral or slightly resistant attitude of students detected by the survey studies. 
A closer examination of the methodology adopted in the studies could shed light on this issue. A total of 21, or 66% of the experimental studies utilized self reported data collected through surveys, interviews, focus group sessions, stu dent self-assessments, end-of-course student evaluations, and reflective papers. It should not be surprising that researchers rely on self-reported data when the goal of the study is to understand students’ feedback about or perception of Facebook usage. However, the heavy reliance on self-reported data also raises concern about potential response bias, which is a threat to studies’ internal validity. Specifically, experiment participants may have a desire to please the researcher, with whom they have formed a relationship (Hro´bjartsson, Kaptchuk, & Miller, 2011). As a result, participants may be disposed to give a correct or expected answer that fits with the experimental scenario, such as by reporting positive outcomes of a treatment they have received (Hro´bjartsson et al., 2011). Such response bias tends to exist where the treatment outcomes are based on participants’ own reports, which is the scenario of many experi mental studies on the effect of using Facebook for teaching and learning pur poses. In the experimental studies reviewed here, the instructor and the researcher tend to be the same person. This means that students directly reported feedback and perception to their instructors, with whom they have formed a relationship. It is highly plausible that students’ reports of the treat ment effect (Facebook usage for teaching/learning purposes) could have been influenced by their disposition to please the instructors and therefore biased toward positive outcomes. The result could be overestimated impact of Facebook used as a teaching/learning tool (Barrot, 2016). 
Alignment between finding and recommendation. The reviewed studies suggest strong enthusiasm among researchers and instructors about using Facebook for aca demic purposes. Except for two studies, all experimental studies reviewed rec ommended Facebook to be used for academic purposes. Despite finding positive effects of Facebook in helping college freshmen settle in the university environ ment, Madge et al. (2009) cautioned that educators should not rush to move into ‘‘a social networking space that students clearly feel is ‘theirs’ for social rather than academic purposes’’ (p. 152). After analyzing students’ cognitive processing using Facebook and another online learning tool, Lin et al. (2014) found that 
1396 Journal of Educational Computing Research 56(8)
students’ concepts as reflected in their Facebook discussion was ‘‘fragmented and scattered’’ (p. 55), and suggested that learning and cognitive tools that can promote learners’ in-depth knowledge construction be used. 
Aside from these two studies, experimental studies have widely recommended Facebook to be integrated into formal teaching and learning, even when the research design and findings did not provide direct support for such suggestion. Using a preexperimental design of student self-selection and no random assign ment, Bowman and Akcaoglu (2014) drew causal conclusion that Facebook course group membership positively influenced students’ learning outcomes, and suggested instructors to incorporate Facebook in their pedagogical prac tices. Interestingly, the authors acknowledged that the preexperimental research design posed limitation to the interpretation of the findings, and still recom mended Facebook’s educational use. Researchers also frequently formed recom mendations based on the positive outcomes of using Facebook for teaching and learning, but paid less attention to the negative feedback from students. Despite students’ feedback about Facebook page for courses being an extra burden of information source and students’ frustration about information duplication, Irwin, Ball, Desbrow, and Leveritt (2012) did not suggest educators to be cau tious when adopting Facebook or other social networking sites for teaching purposes. Instead, the authors focused on students’ positive feedback and rec ommended Facebook to be further integrated into the curriculum. 
Several studies positively commented on Facebook’s potential to serve as a teaching/learning tool, where the findings did not provide concrete support. For example, Arabacioglu and Akar-Vural (2014) compared the effectiveness of Facebook and another online learning tool in course delivering outcomes, and did not find significant advantage of using Facebook except that it provided a learning platform that can be accessed any time. Still, the authors concluded that Facebook had the potential to become an economic and effective teaching tool. Even though the majority of one of the student groups were neutral about whether social media should be used in the learning of computer programming, Dzvapatsva et al. (2014) still concluded that more students agreed on the poten tial of Facebook and other social media to be effective learning tools. 
Discussion 
Substantive Findings 
This study reviewed the current literature on using Facebook for academic pur poses. Overall, the reviewed studies demonstrate a strong enthusiasm about integrating Facebook into the formal teaching and learning process. The most commonly reported positive effect of Facebook is its capacity as a learning platform for enhanced communication, collaboration, and information sharing. It appears that the social functions of Facebook can be utilized for academic 
Niu 1397
purposes in formal education contexts, and the effects have been encouraging. Instructors who are looking for an online teaching and learning tool to enhance students’ communication and sense of learning community may consider using Facebook, which is already popular among students, free of charge, and readily available to both instructors and learners. 
In addition to increased communication among learners, using Facebook as a learning tool has also been shown to promote student-centered learning. A plausible explanation is that Facebook provides a learning platform where students are given more flexibility and autonomy to navigate learning materials, to decide the pace of learning, and to choose the place and time to communicate and collaborate with other learners. This could give students a sense of respon sibility in the learning process, and turn students from passive consumers of knowledge to active leaners. While this could be a promising advantage of using Facebook for learning, more research is needed to demonstrate whether such positive effect is commonly present, and whether it could be influenced by the context of the learning process. Future research could focus on both quantitative and qualitative measurements of student-centered learning as an outcome of using Facebook for academic purposes. It is noteworthy that all of the studies that reported enhanced student-centered learning based such con clusion on students’ self-reported data (see online Appendix B, Table B1) instead of relying on more objective methods such as test scores or measurement instru ments of learning process or outcomes. In this sense, the conclusions about increased student-centered learning are about students’ perceived learning out comes. Although students’ perceptions of the effectiveness and quality of the learning process provide information that is more difficult to measure by instru ments such as exams, they are also more likely to be influenced by factors such as students’ satisfaction level or their ratings of the instructor’s effectiveness (Centra & Gaubatz, 2005; Lo, 2010) and could deviate from actual learning outcomes. Facebook’s positive impact on student-centered learning should therefore be interpreted with caution. Future research should supplement self reported data with objective measurements of the learning process or learning outcomes. Such measurements could include review of students’ course work, observation of students’ activities in class and online, content analysis of stu dents’ online comments and other communications related to class, and scores of standardized tests. 
Caution should be taken when deciding to use Facebook for certain types of learning activities. Research findings suggest that Facebook as a substitute for LMS has some limitations, and as a result students’ learning needs may not be fully met (Wang et al., 2012). Instructors should pay close attention to the fact that Facebook is not designed to serve as a standalone LMS, and when possible, students’ optimal learning experiences should be prioritized over preference for convenience or economic considerations. The adoption of Facebook as a sub stitute for or supplement to LMS is still understudied, and more empirical 
1398 Journal of Educational Computing Research 56(8)
research on this topic could provide deeper understanding of whether and how Facebook should be utilized as an LMS. 
The nature of the learning process and the learning material should also be taken into consideration when deciding whether Facebook should be adopted as a learning tool. While discussion is being increasingly adopted in classrooms, it is only one of the many effective learning activities (Neuhauser, 2002). The usage of Facebook for learning should fit the learning context, learning materials, and learning objectives. For example, if the course content requires learning by doing, the use of Facebook should be limited as a supplementary tool. Matching Facebook’s capacity with learning goals and content of the course could be the key to its successful adoption. 
The implementation of using Facebook as a teaching/learning tool is another key to optimize students’ learning experiences and learning outcomes. It has been pointed out that simply providing students with the learning platform of Facebook is not sufficient. Instructors need to combine the learning tool with predetermined learning objectives for the learning experiences to be meaningful, be aware of distractions in using Facebook in class, and provide students with proper guidance (Barrot, 2016; Bowman & Akcaoglu, 2014; Light, 2011; Kabilan, Ahmad, & Abidin, 2010). This is especially relevant with the usage of Facebook given the fact that Facebook is already an important part of stu dents’ online social life. Letting students use Facebook without a well-structured activity plan may result in off-topic discussions, distractions from learning, or superficial learning process and learning outcomes (Lin et al., 2014). Instructors also need to balance between utilizing Facebook’s capacity for learning purposes and respecting students’ need for separation of social and academic activities. Ignoring students’ privacy concerns could damage students’ motivation to use Facebook or other social networking sites for learning. Empirical research is needed to understand whether students’ need for privacy plays a role in how they participate in learning activities on Facebook. 
While positive student feedback of using Facebook for learning has been widely reported, it is important to distinguish between perceived and actual learning gains (Seymour, Wiese, & Hunter, 2000). In-depth analysis of students’ cognitive processing, learning skills, and thinking skills is needed to understand the quality of learning outcomes. Much research has been done to understand students’ self-reported feedback such as satisfaction of Facebook usage in class, while little attention has been paid to the cognitive processes of learning activ ities on Facebook. Using content analysis of students’ Facebook posts, Rambe (2012) analyzed students’ learning process. The analysis revealed issues including weak study skills, challenges of synthesizing and managing information, and poor time-management skills. Facebook usage provides educators with a view of students’ mindsets and thinking abilities, which could objectively attest to the actual learning gains of using Facebook as a learning tool. More research fol lowing Rambe’s (2012) approach is needed to deepen understanding of the role 
Niu 1399
played by Facebook (and other social networking sites) in students’ learning process. 
Methodological Issues 
The diversity of data collection and analysis methods demonstrated by the reviewed studies is a positive sign that the research on Facebook usage draws information from multiple sources. However, the heavy reliance on preexperi mental design poses threats to the validity of causal conclusions drawn in the reviewed studies. While random assignment of experiment participants is rarely feasible in educational contexts, using nonequivalent comparison groups could control part of the confounding factors and reduce threats to internal validity and increase the generalizability of causal conclusions. For example, using dif ferent cohorts of students taking the same course taught by the same instructor could provide nonequivalent comparison groups, and avoiding self-selection by students into treatment or control groups can minimize the confounding effect of motivation. 
Given the prevalence of self-reported data, the issue of response bias needs to be properly addressed. As discussed earlier, response bias may be present because of the experiment participants’ disposition to please the researcher, with whom they have formed a relationship (Hro´bjartsson et al., 2011). As a result, the feedback from students who have used Facebook for learning follow ing instructor’s initiation may be confounded by their desire to report positive effect directly to the instructor. Hurt et al. (2012) proposed that the actual learning experience using Facebook could change students’ attitude toward Facebook usage from initial resistance to positive attitude, and argued that such resistance is a form of people’s natural reaction to new literary technolo gies. However, Gettman and Cortijo’s (2015) empirical research did not confirm such Facebook Effect. Instead, findings of their study suggest that students who have and have not used Facebook for learning did not differ statistically in their attitude toward Facebook usage. It is noteworthy that in the study by Hurt et al., the researchers and the participants formed a relationship through training sessions, while in Gettman and Cortijo’s study, the research participants had no relationship with the researchers. 
Future research should take into account the possibility of response bias, and try to separate the roles of researcher and instructor. Minimizing the relationship between the researcher and the participating students could reduce the possibility of response bias and yield more objective evidence. Conducting anonymous data collection could also reduce students’ pressure to respond in the way they believe the researchers expect to see, as described by Cook and Campbell (1979). Using the same measurement instrument to measure students’ perception of and attitude toward Facebook usage before and after using Facebook in class could also provide valid comparison. More empirical studies along this line could further reveal 
1400 Journal of Educational Computing Research 56(8)
whether the inconsistent findings in students’ attitude toward Facebook usage for academic purposes are mainly because of the Facebook Effect as proposed by Hurt et al. (2012) or more attributable to response bias. Content analysis could be a more objective alternative to analysis of self-reported data. Given the rich source of Facebook posts by students, content analysis is especially suitable for research on Facebook usage in education. 
Conclusion 
Using Facebook for academic purposes has received considerable attention from educators and researchers. Current literature on this topic suggests promising potential of integrating Facebook into the formal teaching and learning process. Research has mainly focused on assessing the effectiveness of Facebook usage through analysis of students’ self-reported perception, attitude, and satisfaction. While such discussion has been informative, the next phase of research should focus more on in-depth examination of the outcomes of Facebook usage in education. More objective approaches, such as content analysis and control group comparison, should be used to examine the quality of learning outcomes, students’ cognitive processing while using Facebook, whether using Facebook promotes student-centered learning, and how a proper balance could be achieved between Facebook’s social and academic usage. 
Appendix A. List of Reviewed Studies Not Cited in the Text 
Alias, A. A., Manan, N. A. A., Yusof, J., & Pandian, A. (2012). The use of Facebook as Language Learning Strategy (LLS) training tool on college students’ LLS use and academic writing performance. Procedia—Social and Behavioral Sciences, 67, 36–48. doi:10.1016/j.sbspro.2012.11.305 
Bani-Hani, N. A., Al-Sobh, M. A., & Abu-Melhim, A.-R. H. (2014). Utilizing Facebook groups in teaching writing: Jordanian EFL students’ perceptions and attitudes. International Journal of English Linguistics, 4(5), 27–35. doi:10.5539/ijel.v4n5p27 
C¸ evik, Y. D., C¸ elik, S., & Haslaman, T. (2014). Teacher training through social network ing platforms: A case study on Facebook. Australasian Journal of Educational Technology, 30(6), 714–727. 
Hussain, I. (2012). A study to evaluate the social media trends among university students. Procedia—Social and Behavioral Sciences, 64, 639–645. doi:10.1016/j.sbspro.2012.11.075 Jaffar, A. A. (2014). Exploring the use of a Facebook page in anatomy education. 
Anatomical Sciences Education, 7(3), 199–208. doi:10.1002/ase.1404 Jong, B. S., Lai, C. H., Hsia, Y. T., Lin, T. W., & Liao, Y. S. (2014). An exploration of the potential educational value of Facebook. Computers in Human Behavior, 32, 201– 211. doi:10.1016/j.chb.2013.12.007 
Niu 1401
Mazer, J. P., Murphy, R. E., & Simonds, C. J. (2007). I’ll see you on ‘‘Facebook’’: The effects of computer-mediated teacher self-disclosure on student motivation, affective learning, and classroom climate. Communication Education, 56(1), 1–17. doi:10.1080/ 03634520601009710 
Mendez, J., Le, K., & De La Cruz, J. (2014). Integrating Facebook in the classroom: Pedagogical dilemmas. Journal of Instructional Pedagogies, 13, 1–10. Milosˇevic´, I., Zˇivkovic´, D., Arsic´, S., & Manasijevic´, D. (2015). Facebook as virtual classroom—Social networking in learning and teaching among Serbian students. Telematics and Informatics, 32(4), 576–585. doi:10.1016/j.tele.2015.02.003 Pasek, J., More, E., & Hargittai, E. (2009). Facebook and academic performance: Reconciling a media sensation with data. First Monday, 14(5). 
Paul, J. A., Baker, H. M., & Cochran, J. D. (2012). Effect of online social networking on student academic performance. Computers in Human Behavior, 28(6), 2117–2127. doi:10.1016/j.chb.2012.06.016 
Pellizzari, P. (2012). Facebook as an academic learning platform: A case study in mathe matics. Ca’ Foscari University of Venice. Retrieved from http://papers.ssrn.com/sol3/ papers.cfm?abstract_id¼2016139 
Yunus, M. M., Salehi, H., Sun, C. H., Yen, J. Y. P., & Li, L. K. S. (2011). Using Facebook groups in teaching ESL writing. In V. Niola & K-L. Ng (Eds.), Recent Researches in Chemistry, Biology, Environment and Culture (pp. 75–80). Montreux, Switzerland: WSEAS Press. 
Declaration of Conflicting Interests 
The author declared no potential conflicts of interest with respect to the research, author ship, and/or publication of this article. 
Funding 
The author received no financial support for the research, authorship, and/or publication of this article. 
References 
*References marked with an asterisk indicate studies included in the review. *Akbari, E., Pilot, A., & Simons, P. R. (2015). Autonomy, competence, and relatedness in foreign language learning through Facebook. Computers in Human Behavior, 48, 126–134. doi:10.1016/j.chb.2015.01.036 
Anderson, T. (2004). Toward a theory of online learning. In Anderson, T. & Elloumi, F. (Eds.), Theory and practice of online learning (pp. 33–60). Athabasca, Canada: Athabasca University. 
*Arabacioglu, T., & Akar-Vural, R. (2014). Using Facebook as a LMS? The Turkish Online Journal of Educational Technology, 13(2), 202–215. 
Barczyk, C. C., & Duncan, D. G. (2012). Social networking media: An approach for the teaching of international business. Journal of Teaching in International Business, 23(2), 98–122. 
1402 Journal of Educational Computing Research 56(8)
*Barrot, J. S. (2016). Using Facebook-based e-portfolio in ESL writing classrooms: Impact and challenges. Language, Culture and Curriculum, 29(3), 1–16. doi:10.1080/ 07908318.2016.1143481 
*Bosch, T. E. (2009). Using online social networking for teaching and learning: Facebook use at the University of Cape Town. Communication, 35(2), 185–200. *Bowman, N. D., & Akcaoglu, M. (2014). ‘‘I see smart people!’’: Using Facebook to supplement cognitive and affective learning in the university mass lecture. Internet and Higher Education, 23, 1–8. doi:10.1016/j.iheduc.2014.05.003 
Bransford, J. D., Brown, A. L., & Cocking, R. R. (2000). How people learn: Brain, mind experience, and school. Washington, DC: National Academy Press. *Bruneel, S., De Wit, K., Verhoeven, J. C., & Elen, J. (2013). Facebook: When education meets privacy. Interdisciplinary Journal of E-Learning and Learning Objects, 9, 126–148. 
*Cain, J., & Policastri, A. (2011). Using Facebook as an informal learning environment. American Journal of Pharmaceutical Education, 75(10). Article 207. doi:10.5688/ajpe 7510207 
Campbell, D. T., & Stanley, J. C. (1963). Experimental and quasi-experimental designs for research. Chicago, IL: Rand McNally. 
Centra, J. A., & Gaubatz, N. B. (2005). Student perceptions of learning and instructional effectiveness in college courses. Princeton, NJ: Educational Testing Service. *Cheung, C. M. K., Chiu, P. Y., & Lee, M. K. O. (2011). Online social networks: Why do students use Facebook? Computers in Human Behavior, 27(4), 1337–1343. doi:10.1016/ j.chb.2010.07.028 
Cook, T. D., & Campbell, D. T. (1979). Quasi-experimentation: Design & analysis issues for field settings. Boston, MA: Houghton Mifflin. 
*Dzvapatsva, G. P., Mitrovic, Z., & Dietrich, A. D. (2014). Use of social media platforms for improving academic performance at further education and training colleges. SA Journal of Information Management, 16(1), 1–7. 
*English, R., & Duncan-Howell, J. (2008). Facebook goes to college: Using social net working tools to support students undertaking teaching practicum. MERLOT Journal of Online Learning and Teaching, 4(4), 596–601. 
Fewkes, A. M., & McCabe, M. (2012). Facebook: Learning tool or distraction? Journal of Digital Learning in Teacher Education, 28(3), 92–98. doi:10.1080/21532974.2012. 10784686 
*Gettman, H. J., & Cortijo, V. (2015). ‘‘Leave me and my Facebook alone!’’ Understanding college students’ relationship with Facebook and its use for academic purposes. International Journal for the Scholarship of Teaching and Learning, 9(1). Article 8. 
*Gray, K., Annabell, L., & Kennedy, G. (2010). Medical students’ use of Facebook to support learning: Insights from four case studies. Medical Teacher, 32, 971–976. *Grosseck, G., Bran, R., & Tiru, L. (2011). Dear teacher, what should I write on my wall? A case study on academic uses of Facebook. Procedia—Social and Behavioral Sciences, 15, 1425–1430. doi:10.1016/j.sbspro.2011.03.306 
*Hamid, S., Waycott, J., Kurnia, S., & Chang, S. (2015). Understanding students’ per ceptions of the benefits of online social networking use for teaching and learning. The Internet and Higher Education, 26, 1–9. doi:10.1016/j.iheduc.2015.02.004 
Niu 1403
Hrastinski, S. (2009). A theory of online learning as online participation. Computers & Education, 52, 78–82. 
Hro´bjartsson, A., Kaptchuk, T. J., & Miller, F. G. (2011). Placebo effect studies are susceptible to response bias and to other types of biases. Journal of Clinical Epidemiology, 64(11), 1223–1229. 
*Hsu, P., & Yen, Y. (2012). Facebook as a teaching enhancement tool to facilitate college student learning: A case study. Proceedings of the 11th WSEAS International Conference on Education and Educational Technology, 42–47.** 
*Hurt, N. E., Moss, G. S., Bradley, C. L., Larson, L. R., Lovelace, M., Prevost, L. B., ... Camus, M. S. (2012). The ‘‘Facebook’’ effect: College students’ perceptions of online discussions in the age of social networking. International Journal for the Scholarship of Teaching and Learning, 6(2), Article 10. 
*Irwin, C., Ball, L., Desbrow, B., & Leveritt, M. (2012). Students’ perceptions of using Facebook as an interactive learning resource at university. Australasian Journal of Educational Technology, 28(7), 1221–1232. 
Ivala, E., & Gachago, D. (2012). Social media for enhancing student engagement: The use of Facebook and blogs at a University of Technology. South African Journal of Higher Education, 26(1), 152–166. 
Jacobsen, W. C., & Forste, R. (2011). The wired generation: Academic and social out comes of electronic media use among university students. Cyberpsychology, Behavior, and Social Networking, 14(5), 275–280. doi:10.1089/cyber.2010.0135 
*Kabilan, M. K., Ahmad, N., & Abidin, M. J. Z. (2010). Facebook: An online environ ment for learning of English in institutions of higher education? Internet and Higher Education, 13(4), 179–187. doi:10.1016/j.iheduc.2010.07.003 
*Kabre, F. (2011). The influence of Facebook usage on the academic performance and the quality of life of college students. Journal of Media and Communication, 3(4), 144–150. 
*Kent, M. (2013). Changing the conversation: Facebook as a venue for online class discussion in higher education. Journal of Online Learning & Teaching, 9(4), 546–565. *Kirschner, P. A., & Karpinski, A. C. (2010). Facebook and academic performance. 
Computers in Human Behavior, 26(6), 1237–1245. doi:10.1016/j.chb.2010.03.024 *Lambic´, D. (2016). Correlation between Facebook use for educational purposes and academic performance of students. Computers in Human Behavior, 61, 313–320. doi:10.1016/j.chb.2016.03.052 
*Lampe, C., Wohn, D. Y., Vitak, J., Ellison, N. B., & Wash, R. (2011). Student use of Facebook for organizing collaborative classroom activities. International Journal of Computer-Supported Collaborative Learning, 6(3), 329–347. 
*LaRue, E. M. (2012). Using Facebook as course management software: A case study. Teaching and Learning in Nursing, 7(1), 17–22. 
Lenhart, A. (2015). Teen, social media and technology overview 2015. Washington, DC: Pew Research Center. 
Light, D. (2011). Do Web 2.0 right. Learning & Leading with Technology, 38(5), 10–15. *Lim, T., & Ismail, J. T. (2010). The use of Facebook for online discussions among distance learners. Turkish Online Journal of Distance Education, 11(4), 72–81. *Lin, P. C., Hou, H. T., Wu, S. Y., & Chang, K. E. (2014). Exploring college students’ cognitive processing patterns during a collaborative problem-solving teaching activity 
1404 Journal of Educational Computing Research 56(8)
integrating Facebook discussion and simulation tools. Internet and Higher Education, 22, 51–56. doi:10.1016/j.iheduc.2014.05.001 
Lo, C. C. (2010). How student satisfaction factors affect perceived learning. Journal of the Scholarship of Teaching and Learning, 10(1), 47–54. 
Loader, B. D., Vromen, A., & Xenos, M. A. (Eds.) (2014). The networked young citizen: Social media, political participation and civic engagement. New York, NY: Routledge. Lowenthal, P. R. (2010). The evolution and influence of social presence theory on online learning. In Kidd, T. T. (Ed.), Online education and adult learning: New frontiers for teaching practices (pp. 124–149). Hershey, PA: IGI Global. 
*Madge, C., Meek, J., Wellens, J., & Hooley, T. (2009). Facebook, social integration and informal learning at university: ‘‘It is more for socialising and talking to friends about work than for actually doing work.’’ Learning, Media and Technology, 34(2), 141–155. doi:10.1080/17439880902923606 
*Manasijevic´, D., Zˇivkovic´, D., Arsic´, S., & Milosˇevic´, I. (2016). Exploring students’ purposes of usage and educational usage of Facebook. Computers in Human Behavior, 60, 441–450. doi:10.1016/j.chb.2016.02.087 
McHaney, R. (2011). The new digital shoreline: How web 2.0 and millennials are revolu tionizing higher education. Sterling, VA: Stylus. 
*Meishar-Tal, H., Kurtz, G., & Pieterse, E. (2012). Facebook groups as LMS: A case study. International Review of Research in Open and Distance Learning, 13(4), 33–48. *Mena, G., Llupia, A., Garcia-Basteiro, A. L., Aldea, M., Sequera, V.-G., & Trilla, A. (2012). The willingness of medical students to use Facebook as a training channel for professional habits: The case of influenza vaccination. Cyberpsychology, Behavior and Social Networking, 15(6), 328–331. doi:10.1089/cyber.2011.0457 
*Michikyan, M., Subrahmanyam, K., & Dennis, J. (2015). Facebook use and aca demic performance among college students: A mixed-methods study with a multi ethnic sample. Computers in Human Behavior, 45, 265–272. doi:10.1016/j.chb.2014. 12.033 
Neuhauser, C. (2002). Learning style and effectiveness of online and face-to-face instruc tion. The American Journal of Distance Education, 16(2), 99–113. 
O’Keeffe, G. S., Clarke-Pearson, K., & Council on Communications and Media. (2011). The impact of social media on children, adolescents, and families. Pediatrics, 127(4), 800–804. doi:10.1542/peds.2011-0054 
*Omar, H., Embi, M. A., & Yunus, M. M. (2012). ESL learners’ interaction in an online discussion via Facebook. Asian Social Science, 8(11), 67–74. 
*Petrovic´, N., Petrovic´, D., Jeremic´, V., Milenkovic´, N., & C´ irovic´, M. (2012). Possible educational use of Facebook in higher environmental education. Proceedings of the International Conference on Information Communication Technologies in Education, 355–362.** 
*Rambe, P. (2012). Critical discourse analysis of collaborative engagement in Facebook postings. Australasian Journal of Educational Technology, 28(2), 295–314. *Rasiah, R. R. V. (2014). Transformative higher education teaching and learning: Using social media in a team-based learning environment. Procedia—Social and Behavioral Sciences, 123, 369–379. doi:10.1016/j.sbspro.2014.01.1435 
*Razak, N. A., Saeed, M., & Ahmad, Z. (2013). Adopting social networking sites (SNSs) as interactive communities among English foreign language (EFL) learners 
Niu 1405
in writing: Opportunities and challenges. English Language Teaching, 6(11), 187–198. doi:10.5539/elt.v6n11p187 
*Roblyer, M. D., McDaniel, M., Webb, M., Herman, J., & Witty, J. V. (2010). Findings on Facebook in higher education: A comparison of college faculty and student uses and perceptions of social networking sites. Internet and Higher Education, 13(3), 134–140. doi:10.1016/j.iheduc.2010.03.002 
*Sa´nchez, R. A., Cortijo, V., & Javed, U. (2014). Students’ perceptions of Facebook for academic purposes. Computers and Education, 70, 138–149. doi:10.1016/j.compedu. 2013.08.012 
*Selwyn, N. (2009). Faceworking: Exploring students’ education-related use of Facebook. Learning, Media and Technology, 34(2), 157–174. 
Seymour, E., Wiese, D. J., & Hunter, A. (2000, March). Creating a better mousetrap: On line student assessment of their learning gains. In Using real-world questions to promote active learning. Symposium conducted at the National Meetings of the American Chemical Society, San Francisco, CA. 
Shaltry, C., Henriksen, D., Wu, M. L., & Dickson, W. P. (2013). Situated learning with online portfolios, classroom websites and Facebook. TechTrends, 57(3), 20–25. doi:10.1007/s11528-013-0658-9 
*Shih, R.-C. (2011). Can Web 2.0 technology assist college students in learning English writing? Integrating ‘‘Facebook’’ and peer assessment with blended learning. Australasian Journal of Educational Technology, 27(5), 829–845. doi:10.14742/ ajet.v27i5.934 
Shiu, H., Fong, J., & Lam, J. (2010). Facebook—Education with social networking web sites for teaching and learning. Proceedings of the Third International Conference of Hybrid Learning, 59–70.** 
Siemens, G. (2005). Connectivism: A learning theory for the digital age. International Journal of Instructional Technology and Distance Learning, 2(1), 1–8. Valenzuela, S., Arriagada, A., & Scherman, A. (2012). The social media basis of youth protest behavior: The case of Chile. Journal of Communication, 62(2), 299–314. doi:10.1111/j.1460-2466.2012.01635.x 
*Wang, Q., Woo, H. L., Quek, C. L., Yang, Y., & Liu, M. (2012). Using the Facebook group as a learning management system: An exploratory study. British Journal of Educational Technology, 43(3), 428–438. doi:10.1111/j.1467-8535.2011.01195.x 
Wankel, C., & Blessinger, P. (Eds.) (2013). Increasing student engagement and retention in e-learning environments: Web 2.0 and blended learning technologies. Bingley, England: Emerald Group Publishing. 
*Wichadee, S. (2013). Peer feedback on Facebook: The use of social networking websites to develop writing ability of undergraduate students. Turkish Online Journal of Distance Education, 14(4), 260–270. 
*Yen, Y.-C., Hou, H.-T., & Chang, K. E. (2015). Applying role-playing strategy to enhance learners’ writing and speaking skills in EFL courses using Facebook and Skype as learning tools: A case study in Taiwan. Computer Assisted Language Learning, 28(5), 383–406. doi:10.1080/09588221.2013.839568 
*Yusof, J., Manan, N. A. A., & Alias, A. A. (2012). Guided peer feedback on academic writing tasks using Facebook notes: An exploratory study. Procedia—Social and Behavioral Sciences, 67, 216–228. doi:10.1016/j.sbspro.2012.11.324 
1406 Journal of Educational Computing Research 56(8)
Author Biography 
Lian Niu earned her PhD in higher education administration from the University of Florida, USA. Her research interests include critical thinking skills develop ment, student-centered learning, technology-enhanced learning, and quantitative research methodology.