      $
     £ ¥€
            social sciences
Article
Black Twitter: A Response to Bias in
Mainstream Media
Latoya A. Lee
 Department of Sociology, State University of New York at Oswego, 313 Mahar Hall, 7060 Route 104, Oswego,
 NY 13126, USA; latoya.lee@oswego.edu

 Academic Editors: Jenny L. Davis and David A. Banks
 Received: 1 October 2016; Accepted: 2 March 2017; Published: 5 March 2017

 Abstract: This paper seeks to shed light on the ways people of color, in the United States, are using
 social media to challenge racial bias. As part of this investigation, this paper draws on Critical Race
 Theory, Feminist Theory, and Digital New Media studies to examine the extent to which social media,
 while seen as a place for ‘play’ can also operate as a digital homespace, a space used as a tool for black
 women and men to (re)construct their bodies and identities, challenging the “controlling images”
 widespread in mainstream media and society at large. This paper employs the methods of content
 analysis and participant observation and find that these social media forums are not transformative
 by themselves but instead have little moments that make for resistance and a digital homespace.

 Keywords: battleground; black Twitter; digital homespace; playground; textual poaching




1. Introduction
     In the past couple of years, the United States has experienced an intense level of social unrest, mass
protest, and riots partly due to the war on black bodies by police and state officials. On 17 July 2014,
Eric Garner, a 40-year old father of six was choked to death by a New York City police officer attempting
to subdue him. As Garner laid on the sidewalk with officers’ knees in his back and a chokehold around
his neck he gasped for air and repeated, “I can’t breathe”. Although the tactic of using a chokehold is
illegal, a Staten Island grand jury voted not to indict the officer responsible for Garner’s death.
     Less than thirty days later, on 9 August 2014, in Ferguson, Missouri, Michael Brown, an unarmed
black teenager was shot and killed by Darren Wilson, a police officer in Ferguson. Brown’s death
incited many protests in the immediate and surrounding areas. Local people in the neighborhood
were upset with the strong-arm tactics of the police and the state geared towards people of color in
that neighborhood. After months of police investigation, the grand jury voted not to indict Darren
Wilson. Thousands of people flooded the streets, in New York City, Ferguson, and around the country,
for days of protests, blocking bridges and highways in anger at the verdicts.
     Days following the deaths of Garner and Brown, news reports of the incidents characterized
Brown as a thug, gang member, and lawbreaker. Garner was characterized as a repeat offender with
news reports discussing his criminal history. News reports also made reference to the height and
body size of both Brown and Garner, using fear-mongering labels such as “giant” and “huge” to make
Brown and Garner seem super-human, dangerous, and therefore needing to be tamed. What are we to
make of these cases? What are we to make of the grand jury verdicts? More importantly, what are we
to make of the news reports that seem to justify the murder of these black men, through the labels of
criminal and deviant?
     To engage these questions, this research builds on an analysis of textual poaching and social media.
Textual poaching explores how fans purposefully create their own communities to express adoration or
fascination, but also antagonism and frustrations with their favorite media content, including movies


Soc. Sci. 2017, 6, 26; doi:10.3390/socsci6010026                               www.mdpi.com/journal/socsci
Soc. Sci. 2017, 6, 26                                                                                 2 of 17



and television shows, such as Star Trek, and The Walking Dead, to name a few [1]. Building on this
concept, this article is interested in the textual poaching that occurs in social media, specifically black
Twitter, for purposes of challenging and resisting dominant degrading narratives placed on black
and brown bodies through mainstream news coverage. Through an investigation of black Twitter,
studies show that a disproportionately large number of young African Americans use twitter: 40% of
18–29 year olds are active on the site compared to 28% of whites [2]. Black Twitter, a subculture within
the Twitter platform, materializes through the creation of hashtags. These hashtags or “blacktags”
tend to comment on black culture and society-at-large [3]. Meredith Clark, a scholar researching black
Twitter, and Kimberly Elise, author of The Bombastic Brilliance of Black Twitter, argue that black Twitter
can be a space for jokes, for social viewing of a television series, and as a space where people can voice
anger and frustration [4]. According to Elise, black Twitter is one of the most largely interconnected
and tightly interwoven subcultures, more so than any other subculture on Twitter. She argues that
black Twitter’s power comes from its participatory democratic nature—the idea that users, through the
creation of ironic, yet cutting-edge hashtags, create a space to address social issues of racial bias and
discrimination. Indeed, this forum allows for textual poaching as resistance, where the user produces
content that challenges dominant (oppressive) cultural ideologies and norms, including racial bias [1,5].
For instance, the popular black Twitter hashtag #APHeadlines is a great example of textual poaching as
resistance. This hashtag was created in response to the Associated Press’ tweet of the conviction of the
Detroit man who shot Renisha McBride. McBride was a young woman of color who was looking for
help after a car accident. However, McBride’s life was cut short when a homeowner, behind the screen
door of his home, shot her in the head because he “feared for his safety”. The tweet, “Suburban Detroit
homeowner convicted of second-degree murder for killing woman who showed up drunk on porch”
seem to place the blame on McBride for her murder. Black Twitter users quickly responded with
“AP headlines” of their own [6]. For example, one user with the twitter handle, @Phil_Lewis_ tweeted,

        #APHeadlines millions of Africans complain after free cruise to the Americas; slave traders
        find them ‘ungrateful’ [7].

      Another user with the handle, @LaToubabNoire tweeted,

        Homeless blasphemer from low-income Nazarene family, low on stamina, fails to survive
        crucifixion. #APHeadlines [8].

      Another user with the handle @CmartinezClass tweeted,

        Children flee tourist locations in Latin America in hunt for government handouts and
        comfy beds in deportation centers. #APHeadlines [9].

     This hashtag is a demonstration of textual poaching as resistance; through facetious comedy and
jokes Twitter users were able to create a space that allowed them to voice their anger about the lack of
consideration and concern black bodies receive by mainstream news press and coverage, even after
someone’s demise. Soon after the hashtag “#APHeadlines” went viral, the Associated Press changed
the caption of the McBride story and tweeted, “Jury convicts Michigan man in killing of unarmed
woman on his porch”, rewording the language from the previous tweet three hours after the original
twitter message was posted. Consequently, the hashtag #APHeadlines also demonstrates the power of
Twitter, particularly black Twitter, in exposing implicit bias and changing the narrative. It is important
to note that one does not need to be black to participate in black Twitter. In this digital space, black
men and women include those who self-describe/identify. Therefore, those who engage in black
twitter also engage in what Gayatri Spivak calls strategic essentialism [10]. Strategic essentialism
can be useful for building coalitions and organizing; the hashtag #BlackLivesMatter serves as a key
example of essentializing for purposes of creating awareness and coalition building. Consequently,
throughout this article, the term “black” is used strategically without ignoring the multiplicity of
“black” people in the United States and abroad. Ultimately, it is through the exploration of social
Soc. Sci. 2017, 6, 26                                                                               3 of 17



media and textual poaching as resistance that this paper seeks to explore the possibilities black Twitter
provides in challenging racial bias portrayed in mainstream mass media and systemic violence and
oppression that places black and brown bodies at the margins.

2. Background
     There are many contemporary examples of news bias in the United States when reporting on
black and brown bodies, the examples of Michael Brown and Eric Garner included. However, these
contemporary examples have a long history stemming back to the surveillance of enslaved populations
in the United States and early media representations of black bodies. To understand the need and
purpose of these resistant spaces, we first have to explore the formation of the dominant and often
unconscious rhetoric of the black body, and thus black people, as delinquent and criminal.

2.1. Perceptions of Blackness and Criminality
      According to Christian Parenti (2003) the construction of the black body being labeled as criminal
and classified as problematic harks back to the 18th century with the fear of social insubordination
and the disruption of capitalist norms and accumulation. Specifically, ethno-racial populations,
including laborers, slaves, and to some extent indentured servants (folks who could disrupt the
operations of capitalist businesses), were the targets of surveillance throughout the United States.
Since mobility was a crucial source of power for slaves, knowing where enslaved persons were,
what they were doing, as well as being able to identify persons, was of the utmost importance for
better control of these populations. Slave passes, manumission papers, and slave hire badges, a form
of identification for enslaved and “free” black men and women located in the South and North of
the United States, are classic examples of how these populations were controlled and identified.
Another classic form of surveillance during this time were the runaway notices that were posted
in the local newspapers. However, more importantly, the slave patrols or “patrollers”, working in
conjunction with/reinforcing the slave passes and manumission papers, played a paramount role in
the surveillance and identification of enslaved populations. The patrollers were often paid by slave
owners to be bounty hunters for runaway slaves as well as to “be in the know” of the plantation
activities of those enslaved [11].
      The surveillance of these populations continued with the scientific construction of “criminals”
and “problem populations” in the 18th and 19th centuries [12]. These scientific constructions of inferior,
superior, and biological notions of criminals were based on older (racist) notions of differences between
white and black races [13]. However, this explicitly biased pseudo-science was used to justify and
give credence to the continued need to control and surveil this “problematic” population by law
enforcement [14]. This rendering of the black body as problematic is important in understanding
how our institutions were constructed to respond to black bodies. For instance, our law enforcement
agents were directed to surveil and “patrol” this racialized group that was deemed prone to criminality.
The local newspapers often reinforced these notions of criminality and inferiority with the “For Sale”
and “Wanted” advertisements and posters displayed in the paper [15]. In addition, the blackface
[minstrel] performances during this time were also manifestations of the explicit belief that black
people were associated with inferiority and negative attributes. Blackface, usually performed by
white actors, represented and constructed blackness through the white gaze and act of performance.
These blackface actors constructed blackness, in performance, as “childish, primitive, contented and
endowed with great mimetic capacities” [16]. The explicit bias portrayed in minstrel and blackface
performance continued in the 20th century, in mainstream media with the popular and long-running
radio program, Amos and Andy. This radio program, written and performed by two white men, is an
example of aural blackface and relied heavily on racist stereotypes [17]. This popular radio broadcast,
later becoming a popular television sitcom with a black cast, was a staple in black households as well as
white households. This reinforcement of black identity as foolish, imbecile, and primitive, propagated
through mainstream media in the early 20th century, continues in the 21st century with the limited
Soc. Sci. 2017, 6, 26                                                                             4 of 17



and stereotypical roles for black actors and actresses in Hollywood. Furthermore, the construction
of blackness through the practices of enslavement, scientific racism, and blackface performances
(historically and present-day) work to naturalize race (along with these stereotypical beliefs) and
make it appear as if it has always existed; making race an absolute marker of status or condition,
with blackness coming to be identified with enslavement and inferiority and whiteness coming to be
identified with having rights and privilege.
      The Moynihan report on black poverty and the so-called “black matriarchy” or households
headed by black women (1965) is another example of the naturalization of racial bias in the late-20th
century [18]. The report entitled, The Negro Family: The Case for National Action criminalized and
demonized the black [matriarchal] family because it was deemed the opposite of the “thriving” white
[patriarchal] family. Daniel Moynihan, the Assistant Secretary of Labor for President Lyndon B. Johnson
(at the time of writing this report) explored the “tangle of pathology” within the black family and
community(ies), arguing the black family was in a state of disarray due to centuries of white supremacy,
including institutional racism and inequality. However, President Lyndon B. Johnson and the mass
media, highlighting Moynihan’s section on the disruptive black matriarchal family and culture of
poverty, used the report to cite the high crime rates and imprisonment rates and consequently justify
state violence against black bodies.
      The Moynihan report (1965) is important because it is yet another moment (building on the
rhetoric of blackness as inferior, primitive, and needing to be surveilled) where the black family and
black community(ies) were being constructed in mainstream media as a problem due to the “culture”
in these communities. While this report dates back to the 1960s and 1970s, we can see evidence of this
bias towards black bodies in the present moment with the acute criminalizing and victimization of
young men and women of color without addressing the structural problems, shaped by the history
of slavery, the Jim Crow era, and the naturalization of racial bias, which are embedded in the fabric
of society [13,19]. Take for example, the murder of Trayvon Martin that became more of a discussion
about “urban” culture (code word for black) than it was about his murder in the mainstream media.
Consequently, it became an alibi where the adolescent essentially was blamed for his own death
because he was a youth of color wearing a hoodie. More importantly, this long-standing bias towards
black bodies and blackness justified for George Zimmerman, a local auxiliary officer, as well as to
the jury (who did not indict Zimmerman for Trayvon Martin’s murder) the need for the “patrol” of
black bodies. Another example is Mike Brown who was criminalized by the media and local police
because he lived in an impoverished and drug-infested area of St. Louis [20]. Therefore, we see in the
present moment this continued need to redefine blackness outside of the familiar social scripts and
(un)conscious attitudes and beliefs about race and otherness.
      Much of how people come to understand what it means to be a man, woman, black, white, Asian,
Latina, masculine, feminine, rural, and urban is shaped and produced by mainstream media [21–23].
Ultimately, the media is central to what comes to represent many people’s social realities and also
central to the spread of ideas worldwide. Most importantly, the media that comes to represent social
realities are shaped by histories of colonization, slavery, and imperialism; histories that were shaped
by and have shaped white supremacy, racism, and sexism in our society today. Consider for example,
the news coverage of Hurricane Katrina, the tropical storm that hit the Gulf Coast of the United States
in 2005, causing levees to break, mass flooding, and the displacement of many residents in Louisiana,
Mississippi, and Alabama, but, in particular, New Orleans, a predominantly black parish of Louisiana.
Sommers et al. (2006), exploring the way news coverage of the displaced residents in New Orleans
shaped public perceptions of the survivors and the crisis, argue that racial bias played a role in media
depictions [24]. Using an example from Hurricane Katrina let us explore a picture taken of a black man
in floodwater carrying food and drinks in comparison to a white couple carrying food and drinks. The
picture with the black man had the caption “A young man walks through chest deep flood water after
looting a grocery store...” [25]. Whereas, the caption for the white couple reads, “Two residents wade
through chest-deep water after finding bread and soda from a local grocery store...” [26]. What are
Soc. Sci. 2017, 6, 26                                                                               5 of 17



we to make of this discrepancy in captions for two similar images? Why does the black youth get
the unspoken and spoken labels of deviant, criminal, and “looter”, while the white couple gets the
unspoken and spoken labels of survivors, resilient, and “finders”? This example demonstrates how
the mainstream media can and have shaped representations and perceptions of black bodies. Even
when there is no crime committed, the black body gets criminalized by default. Another example of
mainstream media reinforcing perceptions of blackness and criminality can be seen in the 2015 news
coverage of three white men and four black men who were arrested for committing the same crime of
burglary. The ABC Iowa news station used the mug shots of the four black men with the headline,
“Coralville police arrest four in burglary investigation” [27]. Whereas, for the three white men, a school
picture was used with the headline, “Three University of Iowa wrestlers arrested; burglary charges
pending” [28]. Both of these stories were reported on the same day, by the same news station and
written by the same journalist. The choice of pictures used by the journalists and broadcast by the
news station speak for itself; the black men in the mugshot appear disheveled and unhappy, while the
school picture of the three white men display them in uniformed dark-colored jackets, white collared
shirts, with yellow ties. The picture of the three white men not only shows them smiling but it also
displays some sort of wealth and class, as they would only be wearing that type of uniform at a private
or preparatory school. This is another example of the black body getting the label of criminal and
deviant, while the white men who were arrested for the same crime get the unspoken label of smart
and good. The news reports of the Hurricane Katrina survivors and the men arrested for burglary are
ten years apart, yet both reports expose the problem of bias in mainstream news media, while also
indicating the need for spaces that can challenge these biased narratives.

2.2. Constructing an Alternative Theory
      In an effort to explore the racial bias in news coverage as systemic, covertly integrated into
societal institutions, this paper seeks to explore alternative spaces and textual poachers that attempt to
expose these patterns. Susan Bordo’s (1993) [29] concept of battleground/playground and bell hooks’
(1990) [30] concept of homeplace is useful in analyzing the digital space of black Twitter and textual
poaching. By placing these scholarships in dialogue with each other, this article will be able to (1) move
away from the idea that oppressive conceptions of the body have to overdetermine our relationship to
it (specifically, women and men who do not let the attempt to oppress and regulate their body be more
significant than the counter-disciplinary possibilities); and (2) explore [digital] spaces, purposefully
created for collective action and resistance, that often get overlooked.
      For Bordo, the metaphor of the body as a “battleground” ([29], p. 263), borrowed from Foucault’s
Discipline and Punish, captures how the body is directly involved in a political field with power
relations having an immediate hold on it, creating a “perpetual battle” for self-determination ([14],
p. 26). In other words, Bordo argues that the body is never void of history, politics, or culture, and
therefore the body is an important site that is constantly under attack for control, whether it be by
institutions, technology, doctors, and/or the media. For Bordo, the “perpetual battle” is marked by the
individual’s or communities’ struggle to fight for the control of their own body(ies).
      Bordo’s (1993) metaphor of “playground” is quite the opposite of the “battleground”. If the
“battleground” is where resistance takes place, then the “playground” logic works to destabilize
the resistance struggles of the “battleground”. Bordo argues that the playground emerges within
postmodern conversation or technological advances and is ahistorical, apolitical, acultural, and a
space “where anything goes” ([29], p. 258). Therefore, this article seeks to reclaim the “playground
logic”, arguing that while the playground may be a space for play and “where anything goes” it is not
always void of culture, history, and politics. Rather, this article embraces Fanon’s analysis that “black
subjects”, understanding their body as a battleground and the ways racism works, will adopt and alter
dominant ideologies for their own needs and purposes [31,32]. Consequently, this article considers
the ways social media, often operating as a playground, can transform into a battleground. However,
Soc. Sci. 2017, 6, 26                                                                               6 of 17



the question becomes, what conditions allow for such a transformation? To engage this question, this
research builds on bell hooks’ concept of homeplace.
      In Homeplace, bell hooks explores a place where one can seek shelter, comfort, and nurture for
their soul; a place where one learns dignity and integrity, along with faith ([30], p. 41). When hooks
discuss homeplace, she is talking about a specific location, a home, which is run by women and usually
a site for family and close friends to seek safe harbor. However, although hooks is thinking about it
within the context of a physical home, it does not have to be restricted to that. While hooks is primarily
concerned with black women’s senses of home and safety, homeplace can broadly be considered
as any “place” that provides shelter, etc., for black women. The concept of digital homespace, put
forth in this article, brings together the concepts of battleground, playground, and textual poaching,
thus becoming a space created by marginalized and oppressed persons of color, on the World Wide
Web that serves to (re)shape and (re)create individuals’ sense of self through redefinition, sharing of
testimonials, collective action, and building communities. Since marginalized and oppressed groups
often face oppression on a daily basis through dominant mainstream media, which often portray
stereotypical and degrading images and roles of these groups, spaces that celebrate and embrace these
marginalized groups become necessary. The hashtag #APHeadlines, explored in the first section of
this paper, is a good example of the creation of a digital homespace through the playground and
battleground logic and textual poaching, an exercise where users create their own communities to
express adoration or frustration with specific media content, exposing racial bias in mainstream news
coverage. Therefore, digital homespaces serve to (re)create and (re)define individuals’ sense of self
by exposing bias news coverage, and through the sharing of testimonies, obstacles, struggles, and
triumphs that oppressed folks on the margins face on a day-to-day basis, while building coalitions
and communities. These spaces seem to be on-going, with no finite end or beginning date or time.
Also, while these spaces may begin on the internet, they are not limited to that space, and can move
beyond the digital sphere. Accordingly, for this article, the black body is read as a battleground site
where there is a “perpetual battle” for control, specifically combatting dominant ideologies of racial
bias around blackness. The battlefield is social media, and textual poaching in black Twitter is the main
weapon/tool used to confront and challenge both implicit and explicit bias, thus creating a digital
homespace for marginalized groups/persons.

3. Methods
      For this research, a content analysis of the corporate news media and black Twitter was performed;
this analysis spans from 2014 to early 2016. A Lexis Nexis search was performed on the most trusted
news stations and newspapers, which in a recent study by the Pew Research Center were named as
CNN, ABC News, NBC News, CBS News, Fox News, The New York Times, USA Today, and The Wall
Street Journal [33]. The analysis specifically focused on the news and black Twitter content surrounding
the murders of Mike Brown, Eric Garner, Jordan Davis, Trayvon Martin, Tamir Rice, and Renisha
McBride. The Lexis Nexis search consisted of published news reports from the date of the incident to a
month after the incident, and reports after any legal action took place (such as an arrest, grand jury
decision, or trial). There were a total of 433 news articles populated for the six murder victims; out of
the 433 news articles, a total of 79 articles were from the top-trusted news sources. Each news report
was hand-coded, by one person, and scrutinized for similarities and differences in reporting, including
biased key words, phrases, content, and headlines. For the purpose of this study, much attention
was paid to the descriptions and characterizations of the victims in the news reports. The analysis
of black Twitter consisted of an archived content search, performed through the Twitter platform,
on six popular hashtags that emerged after news broke of the deaths of the six murder victims and
jury verdicts. The hashtags included #APHeadlines, #IfTheyGunnedMeDown, #DangerousBlackKids,
#ICantBreathe, #CrimingWhileWhite, and #AliveWhileBlack. These hashtags are important to this
research because they began to “trend” on Twitter within hours of an incident and often shaped the
popular online attitudes about said incident. The analysis of these hashtags was shaped by participant
Soc. Sci. 2017, 6, 26                                                                                7 of 17



observation and mainstream news reports, therefore, the hashtags under investigation were tracked in
real-time. Furthermore, an archived search was performed on all of the mentioned hashtags using
the advanced search tab on the Twitter platform. The advanced search tab on Twitter allows for a
search of specific hashtags and keywords within certain parameters; search filters included specific
dates, twitter accounts, and location. In addition, news coverage of the hashtags is also included in this
research. News coverage usually appeared the same day or within a day or two of the emergence of the
trending hashtag. Due to the transient nature of these digital spaces, a 24-h snap-shot was performed
(beginning from the creation of the hashtag), which highlighted the most popular/retweeted messages.
While Twitter is a public space, it is important to acknowledge the prevalence of surveillance in these
digital spaces (by the state and by other local actors) for purposes of intimidation and/or to silence
dissent. It is for this reason that the popular hashtag messages shared in this research fall into one or
more of the following categories: (1) they were the most retweeted messages; (2) they were tweeted
by popular twitter users (including social/political activist) and (3) they were tweets that have been
publicized in mainstream media; these tactics were used in an effort to reduce harm to users. This
analysis is qualitative; however, quantitative statistical data is used to illustrate the impact of the
hashtags under investigation. Foucault’s (1984) understanding of genealogy as a method was helpful
for the analysis of black Twitter [34]. Genealogy is a method that records singular events that seem
to have no history because the events are often understood as unrelated and not linear. Therefore,
genealogy allows for discoveries of events masked as other or different, events that are often silenced
by history because they are not linear and differ from traditional historical studies, to be brought to the
surface for investigation. This methodology is extremely useful in this investigation of user responses
on black Twitter, which due to the medium, can oftentimes be regarded as ahistorical or unrelated
to social and political events in the mainstream news or society at-large. While recognizing that no
single approach is sufficient in exploring the complexities of the internet, Everett’s (2002) methodology
allows for the framing of the findings on blackness in social media as a “snapshot or moment-in-time
approach.” This method allows for some useful information about this topic to be ascertained, while
also appreciating the fluidity and the ephemeral nature of these spaces ([35], p. 128). Therefore, the
analysis of black Twitter includes 24-h snap shots of the most retweeted hashtags, along with heavily
circulated memes, photo statements, and videos. Notably, these methods expose the challenges of
exploring online environments and the limitations of traditional methods of conducting research due
to the fleeting nature of the information found in these online forums.

4. Findings
     The questions that emerge through the investigation of Twitter and black Twitter are: what are
the spaces and activities on black Twitter that challenge dominant, oppressive, and biased narratives
of the black body found in mainstream news reporting? What do these spaces look like, and are they
always present? In the cases of Garner, Brown, Davis, Martin, and Rice, the findings demonstrate that
social media users have created digital homespaces through textual poaching as resistance, aimed to
“define and encourage a new consciousness among black people” ([36], p. xvi). This consciousness
encourages pride in blackness and stimulates communal responsibility among all people of color
for one another and for the purpose of challenging implicit and explicit racial bias. Reviewing the
case studies, there are three specific ways that black Twitter has behaved as a digital homespace for
black bodies: (1) redefinition; (2) enforcing counter-narratives, testimonials; and (3) organizing and
building communities.

4.1. Redefinition
     The act of redefinition is important, as the constantly reinforced and constructed definitions
of inferior, animalistic, brute, and thug continue to be used to justify the oppression and war
on black bodies [36]. Therefore, in an attempt to recover/redefine and love Blackness, after the
murder of Mike Brown in St. Louis, the hashtag “IfTheyGunnedMeDown” emerged on black Twitter.
Soc. Sci. 2017, 6, 26                                                                            8 of 17



This hashtag marked the way mainstream news sources were portraying Mike Brown, as a gang
member, and had previously criminalized other black victims of police murder and violence [37–47].
The #IfTheyGunnedMeDown hashtag was an effort for people to voice their discontent with the
media’s portrayal and stereotyping of victims who had been killed or injured at the hands of the police
and vigilantes. Consider, for example, after Michael Brown’s murder, news stations searched Brown’s
Facebook for photos and used images of Brown wearing a red jersey and holding up a peace sign,
which was later construed as a gang symbol by news reporters [48–50]. Another photo that surfaced
in news outlets was of Brown staring menacingly into the camera while wearing headphones. These
pictures were used to assault Brown’s character, along with news reports about Brown being in a gang
and living in a neighborhood that was ridden with poverty and high drug usage [20]. Little or no
attention was given to the fact that Brown had recently graduated from high school and was about
to begin college in a couple of days. Black Twitter users tweeted and retweeted the picture of Mike
Brown in his high school graduation cap and gown, the photo his family publicized after his death,
instead of the photos the mainstream media were circulating. Similarly, in the case of Trayvon Martin,
the news media searched his Facebook account and circulated a photo of Martin glaring into the
camera, wearing a baseball cap, and sticking up his middle finger, which blocks the bottom half of his
face. However, the Martin family circulated a photo of Martin smiling without a hat or anything else
blocking his face. In both cases, the photo circulated by the news was used to characterize both Brown
and Martin as trouble-makers needing to be surveilled or “patrolled”, and in many ways justifying the
violence and murder of Brown and Martin.
     Consequently, the “blacktag” “#IfTheyGunnedMeDown” asked the question, ‘what picture from
my social media account would the news use to portray me if I were gunned down?’ Through textual
poaching as resistance, users posted pictures they thought framed them in a compromising light
for mainstream viewers and then juxtaposed this with pictures from their daily life. This hashtag
was named one of the most trending hashtags for 2014, signifying the conscious effort black Twitter
users put forth to expose the bias in mainstream media in addressing the issue of violence against
black bodies [51]. For example, one user with the handle @tydrizzyy posted two photos, one photo
of a young guy sitting across a bed wearing all black with pants sagging, and another photo of the
same young guy from the previous picture, in a classroom, wearing a military uniform, reading a
storybook to young children [52]. There were many pictures of this nature posted on twitter and
other social media forums. Another tweeter with the handle @RevrendDoctor posted two photos,
one photo with a friend and @RevrendDoctor doing a hand sign for his fraternity. The other photo is
of @RevrendDoctor behind a podium, wearing a cap and gown, at a Morehouse College graduation
ceremony [53]. This hashtag was powerful because not only did it start a national conversation about
racial bias in mainstream news media, but it also forced many news media outlets to respond, similar
to the hashtag “APHeadlines”. The hashtag “IfTheyGunnedMeDown”, challenging the narrative
put forth in news outlets, was reported in four of the eight trusted news sources explored in this
research, including USA Today, NY Times, ABC News, and The Washington Post, demonstrating its
significance [54–58].
     Similarly, the “blacktag” #DangerousBlackKids also emerged after a judge declared a mistrial in
the case of Jordan Davis, a 17-year old, who was shot and killed at a gas station by Michael Dunn, a
white patron, who objected to the loud music coming from the vehicle Davis and his friends were
driving and “feared” for his life. This hashtag also emerged as a way to shed light on the murder of
Tamir Rice, a 12-year old boy who was shot by Ohio police while playing with a toy gun in a community
park. This hashtag challenged the way mainstream news sources were portraying young black children
as dangerous and deviants [59]. For instance, one user with the handle @AntoineJLowery posted
a picture of a boy smiling and riding piggy-back on a man’s back with the caption, “Practicing his
choke-hold #DangerousBlackKids” [60]. Another user with the handle, @OdotJdot tweeted a picture
of two small children in a red wagon with the caption, “Young black criminals in their getaway car.
Careful! #DangerousBlackKids” [61]. These examples demonstrate the playground and battleground
Soc. Sci. 2017, 6, 26                                                                                 9 of 17



aspects of black Twitter. Although the users are being flippant, they are responding to a very real
concern, the criminalization and demonization of black bodies. Ultimately, through textual poaching,
black Twitter users took to the battlefield and created a digital homespace to fight for the control
to define their own bodies by being very critical of mass media’s representations of black bodies.
In many of these cases, the news media responded by changing headlines and reporting on the hashtag
response. However, redefining the black body is only one step in challenging racial bias and oppression;
changing the narrative is also very important in this process.

4.2. Power of Testimonials—Enforcing Counter-Narratives
     Activists and protestors made it their task to challenge the mainstream narrative of Ferguson
and Mike Brown by tweeting and re-tweeting counter-narratives of the events taking place in
Ferguson. This is another method of reclaiming the body/fighting for self-determination and creating
a digital homespace.
     In the case of Michael Brown, twitter users pre-supposed the narrative of Michael Brown’s friend,
Dorian Johnson, who was an eyewitness over the police’s take of events. The police and news media
were trying to undermine Johnson’s account of events [62]. Take for example, when reports came out
that Michael Brown did not have his hands up when he was shot; however, black Twitter continued to
side with Dorian Johnson’s account of the events leading to the death of Michael Brown, creating the
hashtag, “#HandsUpDontShoot,” which also became a popular chant with protesters. The use of this
hashtag in protests is an example of textual poaching moving beyond the space of social media.
     In the case of Eric Garner, social media users shared the video of Garner being placed in a
chokehold by police with the hashtag, #ICantBreathe. As such, while the police and mainstream
news sources attempted to posit a narrative of a “big” guy who refused to listen to the police, black
Twitter responded by reinforcing a counter-narrative of abusive police tactics with the hashtag and
popular protest chant, “I Can’t Breathe”. The hashtag “#ICantBreathe” was also named one of the
most trending hashtags on Twitter for the year 2014, as well as the hashtag “#IAmMikeBrown” [51].
Take for example, one user with the handle @sweetannie158 who retweeted,

        MASSIVE SIT-IN TAKES OVER TIMES SQUARE #HandsUpDontShoot #ICantBreathe [63].

      Another user with the handle @CharinaNadura tweeted,

        In front of #NYPD station in times square yelling #HandsUpDontShoot &
        #ICantBreathe [64].

      A user with the twitter handle @Sifill_LDF tweeted,

        Black men do not have to perfect for their lives to have value [sic]. #EricGarner is not on
        trial. He is a homicide victim. #Icantbreathe [65].

     In addition, there were more than 18 million tweets about the hashtag, “#Ferguson”, in August of
2014 [66]. According to a Twitter analysis of the hashtag “#Ferguson”, these Twitter posts surrounded
the events of the Mike Brown case, the ensuing protests, and cases of police brutality [67]. According
to that same report, the hashtag “#BlackLivesMatter”, which is used to create awareness and share
cases of police violence, was tweeted more than 9 million times in 2015 [68]. These popular hashtags
affirm the power of black Twitter in sparking [national] conversations of racial bias and systemic
violence against black bodies. Prior to these hashtags, conversations of police violence and systemic
racism often occurred on a local level. The response from the public, with the help of citizen journalists,
is another demonstration of the power of black Twitter. Citizen journalists are the people on the
ground filming and sharing cell-phone recordings of the protests, police violence, and citizen-police
interactions. Consider, for example, the Ferguson protestors who were live-streaming (sending out
the link via Twitter), sharing on Vine, and tweeting their first-hand accounts with the militarized
St. Louis Police officers and the national guard that were attempting to control the protest and enforce
Soc. Sci. 2017, 6, 26                                                                             10 of 17



a curfew. One video, in particular, that was circulated on Twitter and Vine, a social media platform
that allows you to share ten seconds of video, was of an officer yelling at protestors saying he was
going to “shoot” if the protestors did not back up. This video was picked up by mainstream news
outlets, which resulted in the removal of this officer from the Ferguson detail (as reported on Twitter).
However, for protestors, this officer was just one in many that abused their powers and faced little to
no punishment. However, more importantly, the world was seeing first-hand what was taking place
in Ferguson, with the help of citizen journalists, through a different perspective. Images of police
with body shields and body armor throwing smoke grenades at protestors, emptying cans of mace in
protestors’ eyes, and the huge armored military tanks with loud-speakers driving down the streets
flooded Twitter and other social media platforms during the Ferguson protests.
     Lastly, the sharing of personal testimonies was also a powerful tool used on social media. Users
sharing their own experiences with local police in their respective locations, across the country,
validated the counter-narratives being shared of the Mike Brown and Eric Garner case. Take,
for example, the twitter hashtag #CrimingWhileWhite, which sparked the black Twitter hashtag
#AliveWhileBlack. The “criming while white” hashtag was created by Jason Ross, a writer for the
tonight show starring Jimmy Fallon, after the grand jury decided not to indict the New York City
police officer responsible for Eric Garner’s death. Ross shared his own story of ‘criming while white’ to
mark the racialized double-standard of our criminal justice system, and encouraged other white folks
to share their stories of “under-punished f-ups” [69]. This hashtag, which was named one of the most
trending hashtags for 2014, demonstrated an unequal justice system and a racial double standard [51].
For instance, one user with the handle @skalakattack tweeted,

        Got pulled over for a brake light out. Underage and drinking and blew over the limit. Cop
        let me walk to my friend’s apt. #CrimingWhileWhite [70].

      Another tweet by a user with the handle @cardsgirl1972 stated,

        When I was 20, I stole a pack of cigs, cop prayed with me and made me promise I wouldn’t
        do it again. #CrimingWhileWhite [71].

      Another user with the handle @oceana_roll stated,

        In high school I got in a 3 car wreck that might have been my fault. The cop told me it was
       ‘illegal alien’s fault’. #CrimingWhileWhite [72].

     These examples demonstrate the power of testimony in highlighting discrepancies between
police interaction and race and violence. However, while the #CrimingWhileWhite hashtag may have
been a way to mark these disparities with counter-narratives, many people thought these narratives
were glorifying white privilege; consequently, a twitter user, Jamilah Lemieux, a senior digital
editor for Ebony.com, started what became the popular black Twitter hashtag #AliveWhileBlack [73].
Lemieux tweeted,

        Got raped+robbed. Police took forever to interview me, mentioned that women sometimes
        lie to hide “gambling, overspending” #AliveWhileBlack [74].

     Another example of the #AliveWhileBlack hashtag included a tweet by user Francesca Ramsey
with the handle @chescaleigh,

        I was mugged after dropping a friend off late at night after work. The cops harassed me &
        asked why I was “really there” #alivewhileblack [75].

      Another tweeter with the handle @AkilahObviously stated,

       17 y/o—Drove to Kroger to get my mom Nyquil. Pulled over unexplained. Asked why I
       was in my neighborhood. 4 backup cop cars. #AliveWhileBlack [76].
Soc. Sci. 2017, 6, 26                                                                             11 of 17



     The purpose of this hashtag was not to glorify “under-punished f-ups”, but instead to highlight
the ways people of color have a difficult time just staying alive in regular day-to-day activities, such
as driving to work. Here, Patricia Turner’s analysis of rumors is relevant. Turner argues that rumor
in African-American communities operate as a tool of resistance, a vital mechanism, in which one
uses to protect oneself from continued harm and degradation [77]. This analysis of rumors helps to
explain how and why the testimonials and counter-narratives spread so quickly and became popular
on black Twitter (regardless of whether the testimonies were true or not). These testimonies and
counter-narratives, all examples of textual poaching as resistance, shared different experiences and
stories while shedding a light on the disparities of race and inequality across the United States,
and giving a voice to the often voiceless; but more importantly, they began a national and global
conversation about institutionalized racial inequalities in America.

4.3. Healing through Organizing and Building Community
      Continuing the work of redefinition and enforcing counter narratives, this section explores the
ways Twitter organizers used their forum to take the next step to challenge and reduce bias, racism,
and oppression towards black bodies and other oppressed groups. The organizations explored in this
section have gained popularity through social media. These organizations stand out because they
embrace tactics from the non-violent civil rights struggle and also tactics from the more-militant black
power struggles, they also have an active presence both online and offline and have created a list of
demands for change on the state and federal level. In addition, these organizations created many of
the textual poaching hashtags on black Twitter. These groups, Black Lives Matter, Ferguson Action,
This Stops Today, Million Hoodies Movement for Justice, Hands Up United, Black Youth Project 100
in Chicago, Leaders of the Beautiful Struggle in Baltimore, and We Charge Genocide in Chicago, are
all a part of The Movement for Black Lives, and are similar in that they explore the problem of police
officers acting without impunity as a systemic issue rooted within a long history of systematic racism.
These groups are also very influential through their use of social media. Social media forums, such as
black Twitter, Facebook, and blogs were instrumental tools in organizing beyond the space of social
media. These groups using these tools spread the word of meet-up times and dates of demonstrations,
publicized demands of elected officials, and provided updates to the general public.
      One example of these organizations challenging systemic injustice through social media was
the organized mass boycott of Black Friday. Similar to the Montgomery Bus Boycott, the objective
of the boycott and mass protest of Black Friday, one of the biggest shopping days of the year in the
United States, was a way of hitting the state and nation, where it hurts, their pockets. The intention
was to show that if the state continued to demonstrate that black lives do not matter by the continual
systemic oppression and abuse of black people then they will not support the economic structure of
this racist state. The movement of “Black Out Black Friday” emerged with people sharing meet up
times and boycott locations across the nation through Twitter. The blacktags “#BlackOutBlackFriday”
and “#NotOneDime” were also named the most trending/popular Twitter hashtags in 2014 [51].
This hashtag sent protestors out in droves to boycott Black Friday shopping across the United States.
Many stores in various cities cited the loss of sales due to the protestors who occupied malls, forcing
them to close [78–80]. For instance, in downtown Seattle, protestors disrupted the tree lighting
ceremony causing the Westlake Center mall to close three hours early on one of the busiest shopping
days of the year [81].
      Another example of these organizations challenging systemic injustice through social media
was the protestors shutting down highways and bridges. This demonstration addressed who has
access to walk on the streets (think about Mike Brown being stopped because he was walking in
the street or Eric Garner who was harassed because he was standing on the street corner or Jordan
Davis who was at the convenience store or Trayvon Martin who was walking home from the store).
The protestors performed die-ins (having historical ties to sit-ins), however, die-ins took place in main
intersections and on bridges, demonstrating the loss of Mike Brown’s life and how he was left to lay
Soc. Sci. 2017, 6, 26                                                                             12 of 17



in the middle of the street for four hours before his body was taken to the coroner’s office. Many of
these protests were organized in-person, but spread through Twitter and other social media outlets.
An example of the power of black Twitter, during many of the protests, as events changed (such as
police arrests or blockades), protestors were able to stay in the loop with each other by sending out a
tweet and reconvening at another location within minutes. This caused an increase in surveillance of
Twitter. Some Twitter users even tweeted photos of an unmarked van they believed was scrambling
their network, making them unable to make calls and access social media. More recently, it has been
exposed that the Department of Homeland Security used social media to gather intelligence on the
social justice protests in Ferguson, Missouri, and also in Baltimore. Researchers have warned activists
using Twitter and other social media platforms that the Department of Homeland Security has stated
that social media ‘is a constant provider [of intelligence] and is fairly reliable’ [82]. Continuing this
argument, a former Central Intelligence Agency [CIA] agent of the United States, John Kiriakou, who
was charged and imprisoned for sharing classified information with a reporter (who never reported on
the information shared), told The Real News Network that the government collects emails, phone calls,
and Facebook and Twitter posts on every American citizen [83]. This speaks to the very real threat that
surveillance poses to social actors who challenge the system through social media.
      While the groups may differ on a few demands, what remain consistent are the real-life
consequences and results of these movements. First, with the flourish of trending hashtags circulating
around Twitter, including but not limited to #BlackLivesMatter, #HandsUpDontShoot, #ThisEndsNow,
#ShutItDown, and #ICantBreathe, they were able to (1) create coalitional spaces through social media;
(2) expose racial bias, spread awareness, and spark national conversations of the issues at hand through
blacktags and textual poaching; (3) allow people to voice concerns of police brutality; (4) reclaim
control over defining the black body; (5) assist in the organizing of demonstrations nationwide; and
(6) slow down commerce, by disrupting Black Friday shopping across the country. However, these
organizations have not stopped there; instead, organizers have continued building coalitions both
locally and globally—another example of textual poaching and the creation of digital homespaces
moving beyond social media.
      Organizers in Black Lives Matter, Dream Defenders, and various Ferguson anti-police brutality
protestors took a solidarity trip to Palestine. The purpose of the ten-day trip was to connect with
activists living under Israeli occupation, show a link between oppressions, and build relationships.
This was a powerful trip, with one activist stating,

        In the spirit of Malcolm X, Angela Davis, Stokely Carmichael and many others, we thought
        the connections between the African American leadership of the movement in the US and
        those on the ground in Palestine needed to be reestablished and fortified.
                        ~Ahmad Abuznaid, the legal and policy director of the Dream Defenders.

     There were also tweets from people in other countries supporting and assisting protestors who
were in Ferguson, by providing pictures and videos of how to defend oneself against tear gas, as well
as photos of people marching in the streets holding posters that read “Brazilian people in solidarity
with #Ferguson #BlackLivesMatter” and “Tokyo stands with Ferguson”.
     Lastly, what was most interesting about the digital spaces and movements was the creation
of a digital homespace through textual poaching, which reaffirmed humane notions of blackness,
undermined implicit and explicit racial bias in mainstream news reports through testimonials and
counter-narratives, and lastly the built coalitions which grew beyond the internet. Most importantly,
these digital spaces became sites for the spread of knowledge and history, a particular history usually
located in academic spaces.

5. Discussion
     As laid out in this paper, we see a clear need for spaces of encouragement and upliftment within
black communities. Social media forums, while often understood as a playground, can also operate as
Soc. Sci. 2017, 6, 26                                                                                 13 of 17



a battleground—a space that actively undermines the attempts to oppress black bodies. Twitter and
black Twitter are crucial in the awareness it provides to people around the nation. It was though these
forums that many protests were organized and that information was spread. Social media is most
useful for the tools it provides to organizers. The idea that one can send out a tweet or a post and
share it with millions of people within seconds is an easy way to recruit and disseminate. Similar to
mainstream mass media, social media also has the power to shape attitudes and beliefs of the masses.
In this case, black Twitter worked to undermine implicit and explicit bias in mainstream news, while
also uniting folks in these spaces through self-identification and a redefining/reclaiming of blackness.
      While these spaces are useful, it can also be determined from this research that these spaces
are not transformative by themselves. In other words, these spaces provide little moments that
make for resistance. For example, while observing black Twitter, there were some cases of police
harassment/abuse that did not receive a popular hashtag or receive the same public attention as other
cases. Take for example, the lack of attention the Marissa Alexander case received on black Twitter
versus the Trayvon Martin case. Marissa Alexander is an African American woman who was arrested
for shooting a warning shot in the air to protect herself from her abusive husband. Alexander used the
same “Stand your ground” defense as Trayvon Martin’s murderer, George Zimmerman, and while her
warning shot did not result in a murder, she was originally sentenced to 100 years in prison. This case
did not receive the same amount of attention on black Twitter as the Trayvon Martin case, which was
interesting, since both cases represented a national fear of black bodies. Alexander’s case speaks to a
number of limitations with black Twitter: (1) it marks the types of bodies that are believed to be at
risk for violence; (2) it signifies which black lives matter; and (3) it marks the tensions and limitations
of essentializing.
      Consequently, while there are some cases that people can easily rally around, there are other cases
that do not receive as much attention. This leads to the investigation of “accepted truths”. For example,
in society we easily accept the idea that black men are constantly under attack, therefore, people
can easily rally around those bodies in question. However, black women, queer, transgender, and
immigrant bodies, to name a few, do not seem to receive the same attention. As such, it is quite
ironic that the hashtag #BlackLivesMatter, created by queer black women, is not often used to bring
attention to violence against queer black women. The power of accepted truths seems to be at play
in these cases. Consequently, Kimberly Crenshaw and other activists/scholars deemed it necessary
to publish a study on the institutional discrimination and oppression against black women, while
also creating the hashtag #SayHerName [84]. The hashtag #SayHerName emerged as a response to
the lack of attention being paid to black women (including queer and transgender folks) who face
similar oppressions as black men. Therefore, while these spaces are useful when they operate as tools
to challenge oppression, spread awareness, and assist in organizing counter-actions, they also tend to
be short-lived and sparked by the power of accepted truths.

Acknowledgments: The author would like to extend sincerest gratitude to the following people whose critical
questions and engaged dialogue made these reflections possible: Gladys Jiménez-Muñoz, Kelvin Santiago-Valles,
Bill Martin, Anna Everett, Xhercis Méndez, and Zhana Kurti.
Conflicts of Interest: The author declares no conflict of interest.

References
1.    Jenkins, Henry. Textual Poachers: Television Fans and Participatory Culture. New York: Routledge, 1992.
2.    Smith, Aaron. “African Americans and Technology Use: A Demographic Portrait.” Pew Research Center,
      6 January 2014. Available online: http://www.pewinternet.org/2014/01/06/african-americans-and-
      technology-use/ (accessed on 2 February 2014).
3.    Manjoo, Farhad. “How Black People use Twitter: The Latest Research on Race and Microblogging.” Slate,
      10 August 2010. Available online: http://www.slate.com/articles/technology/technology/2010/08/how_
      black_people_use_twitter.html (accessed on 2 February 2014).
Soc. Sci. 2017, 6, 26                                                                                      14 of 17



4.    Clark, Meredith. “The Buzz over Black Twitter.” Here and Now: Boston’s NPR News Station, 10 February
      2014. Available online: http://hereandnow.wbur.org/2014/02/10/black-twitter-dissertation (accessed on
      2 February 2014).
5.    Gray, Jonathan, C. Lee Harrington, and Cornel Sandvoss. Fandom: Identities and Communities in a Mediated
      World. New York: New York University Press, 2007.
6.    Abbey-Lambertz, Kate. “Black Twitter Calls Out Associated Press for Renisha McBride Tweet, and It’s
      Spot on.” Huffington Post, 7 August 2014. (updated on 11 August 2014). Available online: http://www.
      huffingtonpost.com/2014/08/07/black-twitter-renisha-mcbride-apheadlines_n_5659801.html (accessed
      on 7 August 2014).
7.    Lewis, Philip. “#APHeadlines Millions of Africans Complain after Free Cruise to the Americas.” Tweet,
      7 August 2014. Available online: https://twitter.com/Phil_Lewis_/status/497485447371956224 (accessed
      on 7 August 2014).
8.    Jackson, Marissa. “Homeless blasphemer from low-income Nazarene family.” Tweet, 7 August 2014. Available
      online: https://twitter.com/LaToubabNoire/statuses/497482988813561857 (accessed on 7 August 2014).
9.    Caro.      “Children flee tourist locations in Latin America.” Tweet, 7 August 2014.               Available
      online: https://twitter.com/CMartinezClass/status/497494919272206336?ref_src=twsrc%5Etfw (accessed
      on 7 August 2014).
10.   Chakravorty Spivak, Gayatri. In Other Words: Essays in Cultural Politics. New York: Routledge, 2006.
11.   Parenti, Christian. The Soft Cage: Surveillance in America from Slavery to the War on Terror. New York: Basic
      Books, 2003.
12.   Leys Stepan, Nancy. “Race and Gender: The Role of Analogy in Science.” Isis 77 (1986): 261–77. [CrossRef]
13.   Gibran Muhammad, Khalil. The Condemnation of Blackness: Race, Crime and the Making of Modern Urban
      America. Cambridge: Harvard University Press, 2010.
14.   Foucault, Michel. Discipline and Punish: The Birth of the Prison. New York: Vintage Books, 1995.
15.   Santiago-Valles, Kelvin. “‘Still Longing for de Old Plantation’: The Visual Parodies and Racial National
      Imaginary of U.S. Overseas Expansionism, 1898–1903.” American Studies International 37 (1999): 18–43.
16.   Hartman, Saidiya V. Scenes of Subjection: Terror, Slavery and Self-Making in Nineteenth Century America.
      New York: Oxford University Press, 1997.
17.   Strausbaugh, John. Black Like You: Blackface, Whiteface, Insult and Imitation in American Popular Culture.
      New York: Penguin, 2006.
18.   Moynihan, Daniel Patrick. The Negro Family: The Case for National Action. Washington, DC: United States
      Department of Labor Office of Policy Planning and Research, 1965.
19.   Alexander, Michelle. The New Jim Crow: Mass Incarceration in the Age of Colorblindness. New York: The New
      Press, 2012.
20.   Berman, Mark. “What Do We Know about the Shooting of Michael Brown, and of Brown Himself?”
      Washington Post, 12 August 2014.
21.   Brooks, Dwight E., and Lisa P. Hébert. “Gender, Race, and Media Representation.” Handbook of Gender and
      Communication 16 (2006): 297–317.
22.   Collins, Patricia Hill. Black Feminist Thought: Knowledge, Consciousness, and the Politics of Empowerment.
      New York: Routledge, 2005.
23.   Hooks, Bell. Black Looks: Race and Representation. Boston: South End Press, 1992.
24.   Sommers, Samuel R., Evan P. Apfelbaum, Kristin N. Dukes, Negin Toosi, and Elsie J. Wang. “Race and
      Media Coverage of Hurricane Katrina: Analysis, Implications and Future Research Questions.” Analyses of
      Social Issues and Public Policy 6 (2006): 39–55. [CrossRef]
25.   Martin, Dave. “A Young Man Walks through Chest Deep Flood Water After Looting Bread.” Associated
      Press, 30 August 2005. Available online: http://www.snopes.com/katrina/photos/looters.asp (accessed on
      1 April 2015).
26.   Graythen, Chris. “Two Residents Wade through Chest-Deep Water after Finding Bread.” Agence France-Presse,
      30 August 2005. Available online: http://www.snopes.com/katrina/photos/looters.asp (accessed on
      1 April 2015).
27.   Hermiston, Lee. “Four Arrested in Coralville Burglary Investigation.” The Gazette, 23 March 2015. Available
      online: http://www.thegazette.com//subject/news/four-arrested-in-coralville-burglary-investigation-
      20150323 (accessed on 1 April 2015).
Soc. Sci. 2017, 6, 26                                                                                        15 of 17



28.   Hermiston, Lee. “Three University of Iowa Wrestlers Arrested; Burglary Charges Pending.” The Gazette,
      23 March 2015. Available online: http://www.thegazette.com//subject/news/three-university-of-iowa-
      wrestlers-arrested-20150324 (accessed on 1 April 2015).
29.   Bordo, Susan. Unbearable Weight: Feminism, Western Culture, and the Body. Berkeley: University of California
      Press, 1993.
30.   Hooks, Bell. Yearning: Race, Gender and Cultural Politics. Boston: South End Press, 1990.
31.   Fanon, Frantz. Black Skin, White Masks. New York: Grove Press, 2008.
32.   Mercer, Kobena. “Black hair/style politics.” In Out There: Marginalization and Contemporary Cultures.
      Edited by Russell Ferguson, Martha Gever, Trinh T. Minh-ha and Cornel West. New York: The MIT
      Press, 1990, pp. 247–64.
33.   Mitchell, Amy, Jeffrey Gottfried, Jocelyn Kiley, and Katerina Eva Matsa. “Political Polarization and Media
      habits: From fox news to Facebook, how liberals and conservatives keep up with politics.” Pew Research
      Center, 21 October 2014. Available online: http://www.people-press.org/2014/06/12/political-polarization-
      in-the-american-public/ (accessed on 22 October 2014).
34.   Foucault, Michel. “Nietzsche, Genealogy, History.” In The Foucault Reader. Edited by Paul Rainbow.
      New York: Pantheon Books, 1984, pp. 76–100.
35.   Everett, Anna. “The revolution will be digitized: Afrocentricity and the digital public sphere.” Social Text 20
      (2002): 125–46. [CrossRef]
36.   Ture, Kwame, and Charles V. Hamilton. Black Power: The Politics of Liberation. New York: Vintage Books, 1992.
37.   Holt, Lester, and Ron Allen. “Police say these are pictures of Michael brown minutes before he was killed,
      security video from a convenience store, images showing brown allegedly stealing cigars, pushing a clerk.”
      NBC News, 15 August 2014.
38.   Berman, Mark, and Wesley Lowery. “Michael brown suspect in robbery before he was shot to death.”
      CNN Wire, 15 August 2014.
39.   Alcindor, Yamiche. “Trayvon: Typical teen or troublemaker?” USA Today, 12 December 2012.
40.   Goldstein, Joseph, and Nate Schweber. “Chokehold complaints are focus of city study.” The New York Times,
      20 July 2014.
41.   Oppel, Richard, Jr. “Cleveland mayor apologizes for language used to blame boy for his death.” The New
      York Times, 3 March 2015.
42.   “Detroit Man Charged with Killing Woman on His Porch.” The Washington Post, 6 November 2013.
43.   Robertson, Campbell, and Lizette Alvarez. “Gunman’s account of beating by teenager is detailed.” The New
      York Times, 27 March 2012.
44.   Welch, William M. “Police: Trayvon martin shooting ‘avoidable’; Large cache of evidence released in
      Zimmerman case.” USA Today, 18 May 2012.
45.   Horwitz, Sari. “Zimmerman claims martin started confrontation.” The Washington Post, 27 March 2012.
46.   Will, George F. “Eric Garner, criminalized to death.” The Washington Post, 11 December 2014.
47.   Goodman, David, and Joseph Goldstein. “Grand Jury to Take Up Death Linked to Chokehold.” The New
      York Times, 20 August 2014.
48.   Wemple, Erik. “New York Times Defends Michael Brown Jr. ‘No Angel’ Characterization.” Washington Post
      Blogs, 25 August 2014.
49.   Ford, Dana, and Josh Levs. “Michael Brown’s Father: They Crucified His Character.” CNN WIRE,
      26 November 2014.
50.   Jaffe, Alexandra. “Huckabee: Michael Brown Acted Like a Thug.” CNN.com, 3 December 2014.
51.   Eromosele, Diana Ozemebhoya. “2014’s Most Popular Twitter Hashtags.” The Root, 12 December
      2014. Available online: http://www.theroot.com/photos/the_most_popular_twitter_hashtags_in_2014/
      (accessed on 2 May 2016).
52.   Goldie. “#IfTheyGunnedMeDown what picture would they use?” Tweet, 10 August 2014. Available
      online: https://twitter.com/GoldMouffDawg/status/498625226133868544?ref_src=twsrc%5Etfw (accessed
      on 10 August 2014).
53.   Mufasa. “#2014Faves @withlove_sky: Segun this is beautiful. @RevrendDoctor.” Tweet, 10 August
      2014. Available online: https://twitter.com/RevrendDoctor/status/498568545098563587 (accessed on
      10 August 2014).
Soc. Sci. 2017, 6, 26                                                                                     16 of 17



54.   NPR Staff. “Behind a Twitter Campaign, a Multitude of Stories.” NPR, 16 August 2014. Available
      online: http://www.npr.org/sections/codeswitch/2014/08/16/340669034/behind-a-twitter-campaign-
      a-multitude-of-stories (accessed on 16 August 2014).
55.   Curry, Colleen. “Powerful #IfTheyGunnedMeDown Hashtag Criticizes Portrayal of Black Victims.” In ABC
      News, 13 August 2014. Available online: http://abcnews.go.com/US/powerful-gunned-hashtag-criticizes-
      media-portrayal-african-americans/story?id=24959469 (accessed on 16 August 2014).
56.   Durando, Jessica. “Users Ask Which Photo Media Would Use #IfTheyGunnedMeDown.” USA Today,
      12 August 2014. Available online: http://www.usatoday.com/story/news/nation-now/2014/08/12/if-
      they-gunned-me-down-hashtag-twitter/13982539/ (accessed on 16 August 2014).
57.   Vega, Tanzina. “Shooting Spurs Hashtag Effort on Stereotypes.” The New York Times, 12 August 2014.
      Available online: https://www.nytimes.com/2014/08/13/us/if-they-gunned-me-down-protest-on-twitter.
      html (accessed on 16 August 2014).
58.   McDonald, Soraya N. “After Michael Brown’s Killing, #IfTheyGunnedMeDown Shows How Selfies Shape
      History.” The Washington Post, 11 August 2014. Available online: https://www.washingtonpost.com/news/
      morning-mix/wp/2014/08/11/after-michael-browns-killing-iftheygunnedmedown-shows-how-selfies-
      shape-history/?utm_term=.7995d41c4e74 (accessed on 16 August 2014).
59.   Butler, Bethonie. “#DangerousBlackKids: Black Twitter’s Response to Dunn Verdict.” The Washington Post,
      17 February 2014. Available online: https://www.washingtonpost.com/blogs/she-the-people/wp/2014/
      02/17/dangerousblackkids-black-twitters-response-to-dunn-verdict/ (accessed on 17 February 2014).
60.   AmericaWasNeverGreat. “Practicing His Choke Hold #DangerousBlackKids.” Tweet, 16 February 2014.
      Available online: https://twitter.com/AntioneJLowery/status/435088036213575680?ref_src=twsrc%5Etfw
      (accessed on 16 February 2014).
61.   Jae. “Haaa RT @D_Brandyn: Young Black Criminals in Their Getaway Car.” Tweet, 16 February 2014.
      Available online: https://twitter.com/OdotJdot/status/442169729483300864 (accessed on 8 March 2014).
62.   Lowery, Wesley. “Justice Dept. Concludes that No, Michael Brown’s Hands Probably Were Not Up; ‘Hands
      Up, Don’t Shoot’ Became a Protest Rallying Cry. But Did It Happen.” Washington Post Blogs, 4 March 2015.
63.   Espinal, Annie. “@TheGOPStoppers: Massive Sit-In Takes over Times Square.” Tweet, 15 August
      2014. Available online: https://twitter.com/sweetannie158/status/500199504340336640 (accessed on
      15 August 2014).
64.   Nadura, Charina. “In Front of #NYPD in Times Square.” Tweet, 14 August 2014. Available online: https:
      //twitter.com/CharinaNadura/status/500073066177626117 (accessed on 15 August 2014).
65.   Ifill, Sherrilyn. “Black men do not have to perfect for their lives to have value.” Tweet, 15 August 2014.
      Available online: https://twitter.com/Sifill_LDF/status/500383070571495425 (accessed on 15 August 2014).
66.   Stricker, Gabriel. “The 2014 #YearOnTwitter.” Twitter, 10 December 2014. Available online: https://blog.
      twitter.com/2014/the-2014-yearontwitter (accessed on 2 May 2016).
67.   Hitlin, Paul, and Jesse Holcomb. “From Twitter to Instagram, a different #Ferguson conversation.”
      PewResearch Center, 6 April 2015. Available online: http://www.pewresearch.org/fact-tank/2015/04/
      06/from-twitter-to-instagram-a-different-ferguson/ (accessed on 2 May 2016).
68.   Valasec, Alexandra. “This #YearOnTwitter.” Twitter, 6 December 2015. Available online: https://blog.twitter.
      com/2015/this-yearontwitter (accessed on 2 May 2016).
69.   Dalrymple, Jim, II. “White People Confess to Crimes They’ve Gotten Away with after Eric
      Garner Decision.” Buzzfeed, 4 December 2014.            Available online: http://www.buzzfeed.com/
      jimdalrympleii/crimingwhilewhite-people-confess-to-crimes-theyve-gotten-awa#.rvwQeNwNeK (accessed
      on 4 December 2014).
70.   Skalak, Matthew. “Got Pulled Over for a Brake Light Out.” Tweet, 3 December 2014. Available online: https://
      twitter.com/skalakattack/status/540285886030954496?ref_src=twsrc%5Etfw (accessed on 3 December 2014).
71.   Cardsgirl1972. “When I Was 20, I Stole a Pack of Cigs.” Tweet, 3 December 2014. Available
      online: https://twitter.com/cardsgirl1972/status/540327250324123648?ref_src=twsrc%5Etfw (accessed
      on 3 December 2014).
72.   Elizabeth. “In High School I Got in a 3 Car Wreck that Might Have Been My Fault.” Tweet, 3 December
      2014. Available online: https://twitter.com/oceana_roll/status/540285773321211904?ref_src=twsrc%5Etfw
      (accessed on 3 December 2014).
Soc. Sci. 2017, 6, 26                                                                                         17 of 17



73.   Galo, Sarah. “#CrimingWhileWhite vs. #AliveWhileBlack: Twitter Weighs in on Garner Decision.”
      The Guardian, 4 December 2014. Available online: http://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2014/dec/
      04/eric-garner-twitter (accessed on 4 December 2014).
74.   Lemieux, Jamilah. “Got Raped + Robbed.” Tweet, 4 December 2014. Available online: https://twitter.com/
      JamilahLemieux/status/540536140621946880?ref_src=twsrc%5Etfw (accessed on 4 December 2014).
75.   Ramsey, Chescaleigh. “I Was Mugged Dropping a Friend off Late at Night after Work.” Tweet, 4 December
      2014. Available online: https://twitter.com/chescaleigh/status/540524210549178368?ref_src=twsrc%5Etfw
      (accessed on 4 December 2014).
76.   Hughes, Akilah. “17 y/o—Drove to Kroger to Get My Mom Nyquil.” Tweet, 4 December 2014. Available
      online: https://twitter.com/AkilahObviously/status/540522176785711104?ref_src=twsrc%5Etfw (accessed
      on 4 December 2014).
77.   Turner, Patricia A. I Heard It through the Grapevine: Rumor in African-American Culture. Berkeley: University of
      California Press, 1993, p. 220.
78.   Sommer, Jeff. “Looking for the Effects of the Black Friday Boycott.” The New York Times, 8 December 2014.
      Available online: https://www.nytimes.com/2014/12/07/your-money/elusive-effects-of-the-black-friday-
      boycott.html?_r=0 (accessed on 12 December 2016).
79.   Madhani, Aamer. “Arrests across Nation as Protest Target Black Friday.” USA Today, 29 November 2014.
      Available online: http://www.usatoday.com/story/news/nation/2014/11/28/crowd-protests-grand-jury-
      decision-black-friday-st-louis/19624337/ (accessed on 12 December 2016).
80.   Fieldstadt, Elisha. “Michael Brown Protestors Urge Shoppers to Boycott Black Friday.” NBC News, 29
      November 2014. Available online: http://www.nbcnews.com/storyline/michael-brown-shooting/michael-
      brown-protesters-urge-shoppers-boycott-black-friday-n257881 (accessed on 12 December 2016).
81.   Lerman, Rachel. “Seattle Retailers Hit Hard by Black Friday Ferguson Protests, Westlake Center Closure.”
      Associated Press, 1 December 2014. Available online: http://www.bizjournals.com/seattle/blog/2014/12/
      seattle-retailers-hit-hard-by-black-friday.html (accessed on 12 December 2016).
82.   Leopold, Jason. “How the Government Monitored Twitter during Baltimore’s Freddie Gray protests.” Vice,
      18 May 2016. Available online: http://www.vice.com/read/riot-police-v23n3?utm_source=vicetwitterus
      (accessed on 18 May 2016).
83.   Hedges, Thomas. “Intelligence Agencies are Gathering Information against You in Case of Your Dissent.”
      The Real News Network, 28 September 2016. Available online: http://therealnews.com/t2/index.php?Itemid=
      74&id=31&jumival=17339&option=com_content&task=view#newsletter1 (accessed on 28 September 2016).
84.   African American Policy Forum (AAPF). “Say Her Name: Resisting Police Brutality among
      Black Women.” Available online: http://static1.squarespace.com/static/53f20d90e4b0b80451158d8c/t/
      55a810d7e4b058f342f55873/1437077719984/AAPF_SMN_Brief_full_singles.compressed.pdf (accessed on
      31 July 2015).

                        © 2017 by the author. Licensee MDPI, Basel, Switzerland. This article is an open access
                        article distributed under the terms and conditions of the Creative Commons Attribution
                        (CC BY) license (http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/).
