224                                             Session 6: (Social) Media Analysis



      Identification and Analysis of Media Bias
                   in News Articles




                Felix Hamborg1, Norman Meuschke1,
                     Akiko Aizawa2, Bela Gipp1
                         1
                             University of Konstanz, Germany
                             [first.lastname]@uni-konstanz.de
                2
                    National Institute of Informatics, Tokyo, Japan
                                   aizawa@nii.ac.jp



Abstract

Depending on the news source, a reader can be exposed to a different narra-
tive and conflicting perceptions for the same event. Today, news aggregators
help users cope with the large volume of news published daily. However,
aggregators focus on presenting shared information, but do not expose the
different perspectives from articles on same topics. Thus, users of such ag-
gregators suffer from media bias, which is often implemented intentionally to
influence public opinion. In this paper, we present NewsBird, an aggregator
that presents shared and different information on topics. Currently, NewsBird
reveals different perspectives on international news. Our system has led to
insights about media bias and news analysis, which we use to propose ap-
proaches to be investigated in future research. Our vision is to provide a sys-
tem that reveals media bias, and thus ultimately allows users to make their
own judgement on the potential bias inherent in news.
Keywords: news aggregation; framing; content analysis; media bias



In: M. Gäde/V. Trkulja/V. Petras (Eds.): Everything Changes, Everything Stays the
Same? Understanding Information Spaces. Proceedings of the 15th International
Symposium of Information Science (ISI 2017), Berlin, 13th—15th March 2017.
Glückstadt: Verlag Werner Hülsbusch, pp. 224—236.
Identification and Analysis of Media Bias in News Articles                 225



1      Introduction

The Internet has allowed people to gather knowledge, form their own views,
and engage in society (Mossberger, Tolbert & McNeal, 2007). Unrestricted
access to unbiased information is crucial for understanding current topics.
News articles are the primary source of such information, and thus of particu-
lar importance. However, the coverage of media outlets often exhibits a bias,
commonly called media bias, e.g., due to influencing factors such as the
ownership and the source of income of the media outlet, as well as political
interference, lobbyism, or ideological focus (University of Michigan, 2014).
Not only developing countries, but also developed nations are subject to me-
dia bias, e.g., in the USA six corporations control 90% of the media (Insider,
2014), which results in a high chance of media manipulation (Esser, Reine-
mann & Fan, 2001). Trust in media is at a historical low. Less than half of
the readers in USA trust media and think it is objective (GALLUP, 2015).
Table 1 shows different headlines of two news articles reporting on the same
event from 7 November 2014, during the Ukraine crisis.

Table 1: Different headlines about the same event
Publisher    Headline
(CNBC, 2014) Tank column crosses from Russia into Ukraine: Kiev military
(RT, 2014)   Moscow to Kiev: Stick to Minsk ceasefire, stop making false
             invasion claims

   While Western media, such as CNBC, reported that Russian tanks crossed
the Ukrainian border, Russian media, such as RT, primarily portrayed these
reports as false claims or did not report about the event. The content and tone
of the two articles differs just as strongly as the two headlines suggest. We
assume that readers’ perceptions of the actual event will differ significantly
depending on which article they read.
   Also, consider the following headlines of the same article published in the
New York Times (NYT). The NYT author has covertly altered the article,
including its headline, from mainly complimentary (first row) to criticizing
back then U.S. president candidate Sanders (second row, which is online
now).
226                                         Session 6: (Social) Media Analysis


Table 2: Different headlines of the same article
Publisher        Headline
(Steinhauer,     Bernie Sanders Scored Victories for Years Via Legislative
2016a)           Side Doors
(Steinhauer,     Via Legislative Side Doors, Bernie Sanders Won Modest Vic-
2016b)           tories

    The author also rewrote several sentences, which initially had a positive
tone, to subsequently reflect a dismissive tone. For instance, they removed a
complimentary quote on his “very successful strategy”, and replaced it with a
paragraph criticizing Bernie Sanders.1
    Reading articles that portray different perspectives on an event helps
broaden the narrow and distorted perspective induced by media bias. News
aggregators, such as Google News, enable readers to quickly get an overview
of the large news landscape. However, most readers only consult a small sub-
set of the available set of sources (Newman, Levy & Nielsen, 2015). Reasons
include the overwhelming number of sources, language barriers, or out of
habit. Established systems provide no support for showing the different per-
spectives within related articles. Recent efforts aim to fill this gap and reduce
the effects of media bias, but suffer from practical limitations, such as being
fine-tuned to one news category, or relying heavily on user input (Munson,
Zhou & Resnick, 2009; Park et al., 2009).
    After giving an overview of media bias, news aggregation, and news
analysis, we introduce research questions that are motivated by weaknesses
of state-of-the-art systems to support users’ awareness of media bias and its
mitigation. Afterwards, we discuss approaches that address these questions.
Finally, we present NewsBird, an aggregator that focuses on identification
and presentation of shared and different information to reduce media bias
effects.




1 The early version was preserved by the Wayback Machine (Murphy, Hashim &
  O’Connor, 2007) available at https://archive.org/web/.
Identification and Analysis of Media Bias in News Articles                   227



2       Related work

One of the main effects of media bias is the change of people’s awareness
and perception of topics (Siemens, 2014), which becomes critical for public
issues, such as elections (Bernhardt, Krasa & Polborn, 2008). Reasons for
biased news coverage range from intentional bias, e.g., governments and
companies influencing publishers in their favor (Besley & Prat, 2002), to
rather unintentional bias, e.g., due to the influence of news values (Harcup &
O’Neill, 2001). One popular example is the NYT’s preference for U.S. presi-
dent candidate Hillary Clinton, which may have resulted for instance in the
changes illustrated in table 2. Due to the journalistic requirement of objectiv-
ity, media bias is typically rather inconspicuous (Park et al., 2009), e.g., bias
is embodied through story selection or placement (front-page story vs. on
another page) or word choice (“coalition forces” vs. “invasion forces”).
    The workflow of news aggregators typically includes article crawling and
extraction, summarization of related articles, and visual presentation (Evans,
Klavans & McKeown, 2004). However, none of the established systems fo-
cuses on revealing differences among related articles (Park et al., 2009).
Thus, their users may remain unaware of media bias and possibly different
perspectives (Bui, 2010; Wanta, Golan & Lee, 2004).
    Recent research efforts have attempted to fill this gap, and aim to reduce
the effects of media bias. For instance, NewsCube divides a group of related
articles using extracted keywords and hierarchical clustering. The resulting
subgroups represent different semantic propositions of the main topic (Park
et al., 2009). Another approach makes use of users’ feedback, who set arti-
cles in relation to one another (Park et al., 2011). Sidelines counts links from
pre-categorized blogs, e.g., liberal vs. conservative, pointing to an article to
determine its political orientation. Afterwards, it selects politically opposing
articles (Munson et al., 2009).
    While these and other systems can reduce the effects of media bias by
broadening readers’ understanding of news topics, they suffer from several
practical limitations. First, they are restricted to the analysis of one news
category, i.e., politics (ibid.; Park et al., 2009). Additionally, some of them
rely on manually built knowledge bases (Munson et al., 2009; Park et al.,
2011).
    A major reason for the difficulty of aggregators to show the effects of
media bias is that current NLP methods perform especially poorly in identi-
228                                         Session 6: (Social) Media Analysis


fying semantic differences in news (Park et al., 2009). In summary, classic
NLP techniques that commonly rely on statistics “[…] are just a first step
towards natural language understanding” (Cambria & White, 2014). This
makes the analysis of news challenging, since semantic differences are often
encoded subtly due to journalistic objectivity (Gauthier, 1993).




3       Research questions

This section derives the motivation and goals of our research from the find-
ings of our literature review, which was briefly summarized in section 2.
Afterwards, we discuss approaches to address our goals. While the proposals
from this section are goals and future work, section 4 describes the current
system.


3.1     Research motivation

The fundamental question that motivates our research is how a news analysis
system can help users to become aware of media bias and thus reduce the
effects of unidentified media bias. While news aggregators do not focus on
exposing media bias, aggregators are still a first step in this direction given
that they allow users to quickly get an overview of the news landscape. We
envision a system that reuses news aggregation design and methods, but is
additionally capable of the following:
(T1) Reveal which news outlets portray which perspectives on what topics.
(T2) Abstract and aggregate higher level knowledge from (T1), e.g., present
       possible factors that influence coverage. For instance, different inte-
       rests in different countries or who is the owner of an outlet.
(T3) To identify copy-editing and undocumented article changes: enable
       temporal and contextual analysis of topics to reveal which publishers
       are influenced by others and how.
(T4) Provide a platform for users to collectively view and read different
       perspectives on topics, set publishers in relation, and judge their objec-
       tivity, currentness, etc. Such relations could express publishing (dis-)
       similarity or copy-editing flows.
Identification and Analysis of Media Bias in News Articles                   229


3.2      News overview

Figure 1 depicts a visualization for a single topic that addresses (T1) from
section 3. The upper section briefly summarizes the news topic similar to
established news aggregators. The lower section of the view shows the most
contrasting perspectives from articles on the selected topic. For geo-based
news, such as international topics, a world map (right) visualizes from where
these views originate. For other news categories, we will research further
supporting views. Information related to (T2) will also be displayed in this
view to help users identify the context of this topic and the presented per-
spectives, e.g., the news outlet that portrays a critical perspective on a green
energy topic is owned by a company affiliated with the oil industry.

                    Headline: This text is short and
      News          also informative
      Image         Lead Paragraph: Typically the first
                    paragraph of a news article, which contains
                    some more detailed information.
 Source, e.g., publisher                    color matching
 •    Summary from a contrary sub-group [Source]
 •    This summary shows different information [Source]
 •    This summary refutes the first summary [Source]
Fig. 1 News topic view for broadened news understanding


3.3      Analysis of news development and relations

We propose a second visualization depicted in figure 2 to analyze temporal
and contextual relations between articles, such as if one article is mainly copy-
edited from other previously published articles, and if yes, from which article,
and which sections were copied or changed. The visualization also shows how
an article’s content and tone changes over time (cf. semi-transparent popup in
fig. 2). This way, our system would help to identify cases of undocumented
changes, as shown in table 2. To prove such changes, we plan to use decen-
tralized trusted timestamping (Gipp, Meuschke & Gernandt, 2015).
    The visualization in figure 2 addresses (T3). Such dependencies are not
visible in current aggregators. The visualization would enable users to explore
the origins of an article, i.e., from which an article may have been derived.
Each article is represented with a colored box. Dependent articles, e.g., copy-
edited from another, are connected with a line and colored in a similar shade.
230                                                     Session 6: (Social) Media Analysis



                                                                      Tank column crosses
                                                             Image
      time                                                            from Russia into Ukraine

-5.0 h
                                                            Reuters
-4.5 h                                                                               TASS
                              DPA
-4.0 h
-3.5 h                 FAZ                    Spiegel
                                       ZEIT
                                                                                            RT
-3.0 h                                                                             RIA
-2.5 h                         Other

-2.0 h
                                                                          Other
-1.5 h                       Other

-1.0 h
                                                            Other
-0.5 h         Other


 now
         x-Axis can be arranged by geographic position / timezone, clustering based, ...
Fig. 2 Visualization for temporal and contextual analysis


3.4      General design of the news analysis

To acquire the information necessary for previously described visualizations,
we propose a design that enables the system to analyze any news category,
such as international news, finance, etc. While following the typical aggrega-
tor workflow (cf. sect. 2), we insert an additional task after topical grouping:
group refinement. The goal of this task is to refine a group of related articles
into subgroups that have a maximized expected diversity, i.e., represent dif-
ferent perspectives on the topic. Our hypothesis is that for each news cate-
gory there is at least one dimension that achieves high diversity among result-
ing subgroups created by that dimension, e.g., in international news or con-
flicts often the involved countries have different perspectives on the topic as
was demonstrated in table 1. We want to investigate for other categories
which dimensions are effective in splitting articles into diverse subgroups.
    Figure 3 depicts the system’s group refinement workflow, which takes a
group of related articles and finds subgroups that have a maximized expected
diversity, estimated by the d-score. First, our system generates subgroup
Identification and Analysis of Media Bias in News Articles                  231


candidates for each dimension. The system estimates the subgroups’ diversity
using the d-score, for which it uses user-provided relations and a method we
will term document similarity analysis (DSA). DSA measures the semantic
(dis-)similarity between two documents by comparing features such as ex-
tracted keywords, syntax, hyperlinks, images, and other elements common to
news. We will gather user-provided relations directly in our system by facili-
tating such feedback (Park et al., 2011). Users can provide publisher and arti-
cle relations, and quantified information on news, such as rate their objectiv-
ity and currentness (T4) (cf. ibid.). Finally, our system selects subgroups that
yield the highest d-score. The results are then presented in one of the pre-
sented visualizations.

                            Related Articles

     User-provided                Subgroup
       Relations                 Generation


       Document                   d-score
    Similarity Analysis         Computation


                              Subgroup Selection



                          Diversified Subgroups
Fig. 3 Group refinement workflow




4         NewsBird: Different perspectives
          in international news

We developed NewsBird as a news aggregator that additionally addresses the
goals described in section 3.1. Our aggregator shows both the shared and the
opposing perspectives expressed in topically related news articles. NewsBird
currently focuses only on international news, which we consider a prime ex-
ample of media bias as displayed in table 1 and figure 4. We plan to general-
232                                            Session 6: (Social) Media Analysis


ize the design to support further news categories, and add visualizations that
help users investigate the effects of media bias and get broad news under-
standing (cf. sect. 3). Therefore, we will use the findings we obtained during
the development of the prototype and from an expert case study.
    Figure 4 depicts NewsBird’s design, which is built around the idea of ana-
lyzing and visualizing news topics in a matrix to reveal their differences. In a
onetime or regular process, the first two stages data gathering and articles
extraction are performed to create or update the database by insertion of news
articles. We used a non-disclosed dataset that contains 1.6 million articles
gathered from almost 4,000 publishers from over 100 countries in October
and November 2014. The dataset stems from the European Media Monitor
(Atkinson & Goot, 2009). In future, we plan to use news-please to be able to
aggregate and analyze articles reporting on further events (Hamborg et al.,
2017).

                                     Analysis
 Data Gathering                       Scope


                                                                                 analysis scope
                                                                                  User defines
        Article                       Matrix
                                                      Matrix-based News




      Extraction                     Grouping
                                                           Analysis




             Documents
                                     Grouping                             Visualization
                                                                                 broadened news
                                                                                 explores
                                                                                 User visually




                               Summarization
                DB
                                      Matrix
Fig. 4 Analysis design of NewsBird

    First, in the visualization users define the analysis scope, which contains
query date and two matrix dimensions including their specific values. To
support the analysis of international news, NewsBird’s dimensions are the
publisher and mentioned country. For instance, the cell of publisher country
Russia and mentioned country Ukraine, hereafter denoted with RU-UA, con-
tains all articles that have been published in Russia and mention Ukraine.
This way, NewsBird reveals what is stated in which country about another
Identification and Analysis of Media Bias in News Articles                                                                   233


country, e.g., RU-UA contains articles a Russian news reader might read
about the Ukraine.
    The first analysis task is matrix grouping, which spans a matrix over both
dimensions, creates corresponding cells, and queries articles for each cell. Af-
terwards, the grouping task finds groups of related articles, i.e., which report
on the same topic. NewsBird finds these topics and subsequently calculates
which articles are related by performing LDA on the articles across all matrix
cells. The summarization generates summaries for 1) each topic and each cell
2) on all the cell’s topics, and 3) for each of the topics of the cell. NewsBird
uses the tokens’ TF-IDF weights and cumulates them on sentence level.
    Finally, NewsBird’s visualization presents these analysis results to the
user. Similar to established news aggregators, NewsBird allows users to get a
news overview by showing them a list of topics and related articles. The key
difference is our matrix visualization, which enables a comparative news ex-
ploration by showing both shared and opposing information in parallel as
depicted in figure 5.
                                                            Mentioned Countries
                                    UA                      RU             GB                                     DE
                           Foreign Policy Adviser        Ukraine Crisis,
                                Says Russia            Sanctions Against       Cameron Says Britain         Berlin wall: the
                      RU    Committed to Peace         Russia Not on G20        Will Pay Only Half of    symbol of Cold War as
                              Process in East         Agenda in Australia:     $2.6 Bln EU Surcharge         an art object
                                  Ukraine               Russian Sherpa
Publisher Countries




                                                                               Cameron has warned
                             Ukraine crisis: Kiev                                                        Fall of the Berlin Wall:
                                                      Tank column crosses      there wil be a „major
                              accuses Russia of                                                                ‚Our tears of
                      GB   military invasion after
                                                        from Russia into        problem“ if Brussels
                                                                                                          frustration turned to
                                                     Ukraine – Kiev military      insists on Britain
                            ‚tanks cross border‘                                                               those of joy‘
                                                                                 paying its $2.6 bn

                           Kyiv calls Berlin amid
                                                      Kyiv: 32 tanks enter       Britain allowed to       Germany‘s east still
                      DE    Russian incursion
                                                      Ukraine from Russia       halve EU budget bill         lags behind
                                  reports



                             Ukraine accuses           Ukraine accuses         Britain finds deal with
                                                                                                         AP WAS THERE: The
                      US    Russia of sending in      Russia of sending in     EU over controversial
                                                                                                         Berlin Wall crumbles
                             donzens of tanks          donzens of tanks                   bill



Fig. 5 Comparative news exploration in NewsBird

   Figure 5 illustrates the efficacy of NewsBird’s visualization on the exem-
plary topic of the Ukraine crisis from 7 November 2014, which was intro-
duced in table 1. Note how the matrix reveals that media in the analyzed
Western countries (rows) primarily reports that Russian tanks have invaded
234                                        Session 6: (Social) Media Analysis


Ukraine (in both Russia and Ukraine columns). However, the cell RU-UA
shows that Russian media’s most frequent topic involving the Ukraine is
Russia’s commitment to the peace process in the Ukraine.
   We conducted an expert case study with one participant where we col-
lected observational and think aloud data as well as information from eye
gaze tracking and a follow-up interview to assess the subjective experience.
Given the early stage of this project, we were mainly interested in whether
users find NewsBird helpful to become aware of media bias and understand
resulting differences in news coverage. We used three real-world news sce-
narios, including the Russian tank invasion on 7 November 2014, which we
briefly introduced in section 1. We found that NewsBird enables users to get
an overview of the current news situation similarly to established news ag-
gregators. Furthermore, the user reported that using NewsBird he became
aware of media bias and how this can lead to differences in news coverage
for the first time.




5      Conclusion

In this paper, we introduced NewsBird, a news aggregator that aims to ad-
dress practical limitations of established systems. NewsBird uses a two-
dimensional matrix spanned by publisher and mentioned countries. This way,
related articles are split into subgroups that have a large expected diversity
and reveal differences in news coverage. While the current prototype is lim-
ited to the category of international news, our expert case study has shown
that NewsBird already enables users to identify the effects of media bias and
thus broaden users’ news understanding. Furthermore, NewsBird has helped
us identify directions for further research. The main goal will be the generali-
zation of the current workflow to further news categories. We proposed mul-
tiple concepts for investigation, such as visualizations that reveal article and
publisher dependencies, and a method to show temporal and contextual
changes in news articles. To implement these aims, we will investigate and
enhance NLP methods, e.g., to extract entities from news texts and measure
article similarity by using both text and non-text features of news articles.
This will help users in identifying and comparing media bias in current news
topics, and thus ultimately reduce the effects of media bias in news coverage.
Identification and Analysis of Media Bias in News Articles                       235



References

Atkinson, M., and E. Van der Goot (2009): Near real time information mining in
   multilingual news. In: Proceedings of the 18th international conference on World
   Wide Web (pp. 1153–1154). ACM.
Bernhardt, D., S. Krasa, and M. Polborn (2008): Political polarization and the elec-
   toral effects of media bias. In: Journal of Public Economics, 92 (5), 1092–1104.
Besley, T. J., and A. Prat (2002): Handcuffs for the grabbing hand? Media capture
   and government accountability. CEPR Discussion Paper.
Bui, C. (2010): How online gatekeepers guard our view: News portals’ inclusion and
   ranking of media and events. In: Global Media J., 9 (16), 1–41.
Cambria, E., and B. White (2014): Jumping NLP curves: a review of natural
  language processing research. In: Computational Intelligence Magazine, IEEE,
  9 (2), 48–57.
CNBC (2014): Tank column crosses from Russia into Ukraine: Kiev military.
  http://www.cnbc.com/id/102155038
Esser, F., C. Reinemann, and D. Fan (2001): Spin Doctors in the United States, Great
   Britain, and Germany Metacommunication about Media Manipulation. In: The
   Harvard International Journal of Press/Politics, 6 (1), 16–45.
Evans, D. K., J. L. Klavans, and K. R. McKeown (2004): Columbia newsblaster:
   multilingual news summarization on the Web. In: Demonstration Papers at HLT-
   NAACL 2004 (pp. 1–4). ACL.
GALLUP (2015): Americans’ Trust in Media Remains at Historical Low.
  http://www.gallup.com/poll/185927/americans-trust-media-remains-historical-
  low.aspx
Gauthier, G. (1993): In defence of a supposedly outdated notion: The range of appli-
   cation of journalistic objectivity. In: Canadian Journal of communication, 18 (4),
   497–505.
Gipp, B., Meuschke, N., & Gernandt, A. (2015): Decentralized Trusted Timestamp-
   ing using the Crypto Currency Bitcoin. In: Proceedings of the iConference 2015
   (to appear). Newport Beach, CA, USA. http://ischools.org/the-iconference/
Hamborg, F., Meuschke, N., Breitinger, C., & Gipp, B. (2017): news-please: A Ge-
  neric News Crawler and Extractor. In: M. Gäde, V. Trkulja and V. Petras (eds.):
  Everything Changes, Everything Stays the Same? Understanding Information
  Spaces. Proceedings of the 15th International Symposium of Information Science
  (ISI 2017), Berlin, 13th–15th March 2017. Glückstadt: Hülsbusch, pp. 218–223.
Harcup, T., & O’Neill, D. (2001): What is news? Galtung and Ruge revisited. In:
   Journalism studies, 2 (2), 261–280.
236                                            Session 6: (Social) Media Analysis


Insider, B. (2014): These 6 Corporations Control 90% of the Media in America.
    http://www.businessinsider.com/these-6-corporations-control-90-of-the-media-
    in-america-2012-6
Mossberger, K., Tolbert, C. J., & McNeal, R. S. (2007): Digital citizenship: The
  Internet, society, and participation. MIT Press.
Munson, S. A., Zhou, D. X., & Resnick, P. (2009): Sidelines: An Algorithm for In-
  creasing Diversity in News and Opinion Aggregators. ICWSM.
Newman, N., Levy, D. A., & Nielsen, R. K. (2015): Reuters Institute Digital News
  Report 2015. Available at SSRN 2619576.
Park, S., Kang, S., Chung, S., & Song, J. (2009): NewsCube: delivering multiple
   aspects of news to mitigate media bias. In: Proceedings of the SIGCHI Confer-
   ence on Human Factors in Computing Systems (pp. 443–452). ACM.
Park, S., Ko, M., Kim, J., Choi, H., & Song, J. (2011): NewsCube 2.0: An Explora-
   tory Design of a Social News Website for Media Bias Mitigation. In: Workshop
   on Social Recommender Systems.
RT (2014): Moscow to Kiev: Stick to Minsk ceasefire, stop making false ‘invasion’
  claims. http://rt.com/news/203203-ukraine-russia-troops-border/
Siemens, G. (2014): Connectivism: A learning theory for the digital age. http://www.
   itdl.org/journal/jan_05/article01.htm
Steinhauer, J. (2016a): Bernie Sanders Scored Victories for Years via Legislative Side
    Doors. https://web.archive.org/web/20160314164825/http:/www.nytimes.com/
    2016/03/15/us/politics/bernie-sanders-amendments.html?partner=rss&emc=rss
Steinhauer, J. (2016b): Via Legislative Side Doors, Bernie Sanders Won Modest Vic-
    tories.    https://web.archive.org/web/20160314164825/http:/www.nytimes.com/
    2016/03/15/us/politics/bernie-sanders-amendments.html?partner=rss&emc=rss
University of Michigan (2014): News Bias Explored – The art of reading the news.
   http://umich.edu/~newsbias/index.html
Wanta, W., Golan, G., & Lee, C. (2004): Agenda setting and international news:
  Media influence on public perceptions of foreign nations. In: Journalism & Mass
  Communication Quarterly, 81 (2), 364–377.
