       Journal of Children and Media




       ISSN: (Print) (Online) Journal homepage: https://www.tandfonline.com/loi/rchm20




Introducing the Social Media Literacy (SMILE)
model with the case of the positivity bias on social
media

Lara Schreurs & Laura Vandenbosch

To cite this article: Lara Schreurs & Laura Vandenbosch (2021) Introducing the Social Media
Literacy (SMILE) model with the case of the positivity bias on social media, Journal of Children and
Media, 15:3, 320-337, DOI: 10.1080/17482798.2020.1809481

To link to this article: https://doi.org/10.1080/17482798.2020.1809481




       Published online: 16 Aug 2020.



       Submit your article to this journal



       Article views: 3573



       View related articles



       View Crossmark data



       Citing articles: 14 View citing articles




                       Full Terms & Conditions of access and use can be found at
             https://www.tandfonline.com/action/journalInformation?journalCode=rchm20
JOURNAL OF CHILDREN AND MEDIA
2021, VOL. 15, NO. 3, 320–337
https://doi.org/10.1080/17482798.2020.1809481




Introducing the Social Media Literacy (SMILE) model with the
case of the positivity bias on social media
Lara Schreursa,b and Laura Vandenboscha
a
    School for Mass Communication Research, Faculty of Social Sciences, KU Leuven, Leuven, Belgium;
b
    Research Foundation Flanders (FWO-Vlaanderen), Brussels, Belgium


      ABSTRACT                                                                    ARTICLE HISTORY
      Although current literature has extensively discussed media                 Received 19 August 2019
      literacy processes, few theories exist explaining the role of social        Revised 3 August 2020
      media literacy. Social media are used daily by a substantial                Accepted 10 August 2020
      number of young people and may exert an important influence                 KEYWORDS
      on its users’ well-beings. Considering media literacy, media                Social media literacy; the
      effects, social psychology, interpersonal communication and                 positivity bias on social
      educational literature, a novel theoretical framework called the            media; empowerment;
      Social Media Literacy (SMILE) model is introduced. This frame­              development
      work was formulated to explain (1) how to conceptualize social
      media literacy, (2) how social media literacy can change the
      dynamics between social media and its users and (3) how
      participatory mediation processes result into social media lit­
      eracy. The SMILE-model is illustrated against the background
      of the social media positivity bias. Ultimately, the newly devel­
      oped guiding framework aims to stimulate more theory-driven
      research into the scholarly understanding of social media lit­
      eracy in well-being. Such insights may especially be useful for
      research in the field of children, adolescents and the media.



Growing concerns from scholars and policy makers about the pervasive usage of social
media in the current society echo the scholarly call for more research into effective
measures to help especially young social media users get the most out of their social
media experiences (Kleemans, Daalmans, Carbaat, & Anschütz, 2018). Within the limited
research that mainly exists among young users, social media literacy has recently been
suggested as a promising direction in this regard (Tamplin, Mclean, & Paxton, 2018).
Daneels and Vanwynsberghe (2017) define social media literacy as “the technical and
cognitive competencies users need to use social media in an effective and efficient way
for social interaction and communication on the web”. Livingstone (2014) emphasizes in
her view on social media literacy its potential to help children avoid (privacy) risks and
safely explore the opportunities of the online environment. One scholar has conceptua­
lized this concept from a domain-specific area of social media effects and defined it as
a critical understanding of both advertisers and peers’ motivations and techniques for
modifying social media images (Tamplin et al., 2018).


CONTACT Laura Vandenbosch         laura.vandenbosch@soc.kuleuven.be   School for Mass Communication Research,
KU Leuven, Leuven B-3000, Belgium
© 2020 Informa UK Limited, trading as Taylor & Francis Group
                                                      JOURNAL OF CHILDREN AND MEDIA        321


    Although these first attempts to conceptualize (and study) social media literacy are
valuable, this paper argues that their definitions do not adequately address the complex­
ities that are central within this concept. Social media literacy can be partly embedded in
the rich area of literature on media literacy (Daneels & Vanwynsberghe, 2017), however,
the distinctive characteristics of social media (e.g., content creating/editing and exponen­
tial opportunities for interactions and social comparisons with “similar” peers) warrant
a unique approach. The different dynamics in which social media literacy operates have
not been at the core of previous conceptualizations as these conceptualizations mainly
occurred in empirical research and thus did not aim to theoretically explain its role in
youth’s well-being.
    To address these gaps, the Social Media Literacy (SMILE) model is introduced and
embodies a first guiding framework for social media literacy. The model bridges the
literature on (social) media effects with insights from traditional media literacy research,
educational and social psychology literature (1) to conceptualize social media literacy,
(2) to explain its development, and (3) to describe its role in social media user interac­
tions. The model starts from the idea that social media literacy can maximize the
opportunities and minimalize or even prevent the risks of social media use. In its core,
the SMILE-model intends to inspire more theory-driven research lines on the role of
social media literacy in social media effects, ultimately aiming to contribute to young
people’s overall well-being.
    Moreover, current perspectives on traditional media literacy emphasize that different
types of media literacy share several components across the media effects that they each
target, but, at the same time, different characteristics exist within each media literacy area
(e.g., appearance, sexuality and violence) (Byrne, 2009). Similarly, each area of social media
effects is typified by unique dynamics and peculiarities. For example, different character­
istics exist for social media effects regarding privacy concerns, safety issues, cyberbullying
and body image. Consequently, we illustrate the general model’s assumptions for one
single area of social media literacy: The social media positivity bias among adolescents.
This area was selected because adolescents are among the most frequent daily users of
social media (Anderson & Jiang, 2018) and during their usage, they interact endlessly with
positively biased posts. The positivity bias has increasingly been hold responsible for
adolescents’ decreased mental well-being (e.g., Kleemans et al., 2018), which is a pertinent
public concern in today’s society.


Defining the meaning of social media literacy
Media literacy fundamentally aims to provide users with the necessary critical autonomy
to interact with media in a healthy and responsible way (Aufderheide, 1993). At its core,
media literacy will reduce negative media effects and maximize positive ones. In contrast
to the strong consensus on the value of media literacy, scholars disagree upon the key
elements that define this concept with regards to traditional media (Jeong, Cho, & Hwang,
2012) and social media (e.g., Daneels & Vanwynsberghe, 2017; Tamplin et al., 2018). To
seek direction in this clutter of interpretations, we define social media literacy as follows:
“the extent to which cognitive and affective structures are present among users to ensure the
risks of interactions with social media content are mitigated and the opportunities are
maximized.” According to this definition, social media literacy can be seen as
322      L. SCHREURS AND L. VANDENBOSCH


a continuous variable with two subcomponents (i.e., cognitive and affective structures)
that each are present in varying levels.
    The subcomponent of cognitive structures is adopted from Potter’s (2004) processing
model and extended with insights from social media literature (Boyd & Ellison, 2008).
Cognitive structures include sets of organized knowledge in the user’s memory that
provide the user with sufficient resources to process social media content adequately
(Lang, 2017). As such, these structures guide the construction and interpretation of social
media content. This knowledge entails different layers of understanding within social
media effects. In its most basic level, adolescents are not social media literate and thus do
not understand what different types of social media effects are or could be. At an average
level, knowledge on the effects exists but is not, or inconsistently, applied. Accordingly,
a more passive form of cognitive structures is present as the structures are not always
actively applied when using social media. At a high level, adolescents actively use their
cognitive structures and interpret, reflect on and understand social media content within
its specific context. They thereby empower themselves during their social media experi­
ences. Even more, they act with a sense of responsibility towards other users when
developing their own posts.
    Part of the cognitive structures are rooted in users’ traditional media literacy. Existing
knowledge on the commercial intent of media industries (Potter, 2004) can help a user
reflect upon the revenue strategies of social media companies, but also companies that
use social media for profit purposes (Vanwynsberghe, 2014). Understandings of produc­
tion techniques of traditional media, such as television and magazines (Potter, 2004), are
relevant to interpret the sharing of traditionally produced messages on social media. Yet,
such understandings will need to be further tailored to the peculiarities of social media
(e.g., who shares the video with what intent, what is the meaning of receiving likes, re-
posting and comments).
    Regarding these peculiarities, social media content is much more personal and self-
focused than traditional media content (Perloff, 2014). The audience of social media
messages is not conceptualized as heterogeneous or anonymous, but consists of indivi­
duals who are similar to the sender. Social media are said to be “fundamentally media of
one’s peers” (Perloff, 2014, p. 366). These peers are all allowed to directly transmit
personal-generated content on social media (Perloff, 2014). Thus apart from being passive
recipients of media content – which also occurs very frequently on social media – users
can interactively create, edit and share messages within their personal online network by
using the platform’s instant messaging technology and its tools to post status updates
and share photos/videos (Tsitsika et al., 2014).
    Due to their interactive nature, social media are eminent tools for interpersonal
communication. Users can extend their offline relations online or initiate new social ties.
Social media interactions are editable and highly accessible, develop asynchronously, and
allow a limited and selective set of social-contextual cues to be present. Because of these
affordances, social media interactions differ in their core from offline interactions and
impact communication processes and social relationships in different ways (Walther,
2017). Social media literate adolescents have developed cognitive structures on these
unique social mediated interpersonal norms and dynamics. Together, cognitive structures
of social media literacy include understandings of (a) traditional media literacy, (b) social
media features and (c) interpersonal communication dynamics on social media.
                                                     JOURNAL OF CHILDREN AND MEDIA        323


    The subcomponent of affective structures refers to sets of organized emotions in the
users’ memory which guide (spontaneous) emotions in response to using social media.
The inclusion of this subcomponent builds upon the insight of traditional media literacy
literature that cognitive structures alone are not sufficient to counter adversarial media
effects (Austin & Pinkleton, 2016) and the importance of the capitalization of the positive
outcomes that follow from social media interactions (Palmer, Ramsey, Morey, & Gentzler,
2016). First, traditional media literacy literature argues that although users may be aware
of the negative effects of media content, such media content may still spontaneously and
thus instinctively appeal to, and even emotionally affect, youth (Gill, 2012). Therefore,
being literate cannot be about possessing the “right” affective responses but instead
relates to managing one’s affective responses. In this regard, emotion regulation literature
has typically distinguished between adaptive and maladaptive strategies to manage one’s
affective responses, based on the strategies’ relations to mental health (Cracco, Goossens,
& Braet, 2017). What characterizes a social media literate user is that he/she would rather
apply adaptive than maladaptive strategies when experiencing negative or positive
emotions resulting from one’s social media usage.
    Also, literature on social media and positive well-being specifically suggests that
affective structures determine the upward spiral toward psychological well-being that
may follow after positive social media interactions (Fredrickson & Joiner, 2002). Engaging
in self-posting behavior, but also exposure to social media content posted by others is
accordingly more likely to trigger positive outcomes if individuals possess the necessary
adaptive emotional regulation strategies to maximize the enjoyment state (e.g., Palmer
et al., 2016; Tugade & Fredrickson, 2007).


The Social Media Literacy (SMILE) model
Ample studies have assessed the effectiveness of media literacy. For instance, it has been
demonstrated that media literacy education can increase media knowledge and criticism,
reduce media realism and diminish the influence of desirable media portrayals of social
actors (Jeong et al., 2012; Vahedi, Sibalis, & Sutherland, 2018). In addition, scant evidence
exists on the actual decline/increase of negative media effects when media literacy
increases (Vahedi et al., 2018; Xie, Gai, & Zhou, 2019). Yet for social media, such evidence
is missing which may be because no model exists that can explain the mechanisms
relating to social media literacy. The SMILE-model was designed to map and understand
such processes, and puts forward five assumptions that relate to empowering social media
users (assumptions 1–2; see Figure 1) and developing social media literacy (assumptions
3–5; see Figure 1).

Empowerment
As for empowerment, the SMILE-model suggests two assumptions that directly build on
the Differential Susceptibility to Media Effects Model (DSMM) (Valkenburg & Peter, 2013),
which integrates insights from renowned media effects theories and social psychology
literature.

Assumption 1: Social media literacy as a moderator. Social media literacy is assumed to
operate as a moderator in the relation between social media use and well-being. Social
324      L. SCHREURS AND L. VANDENBOSCH




Figure 1. The SMILE-model.



learning theory (Bandura, 2001), script theory (Wright, 2011), and media literacy theory
(Potter, 2004) explain that when specific social media content conflicts with a user’s
cognitions, a negative well-being effect is less likely. Potentially harmful social media
interactions will clash with the cognitive, and therefore also with the affective structures
of literate users. As these users have a thorough understanding of the negative effects
that one’s own behaviors and certain content types of others could trigger, they are in
control of their affective responses towards these behaviors and contents. Accordingly,
they adaptively regulate the rare negative emotions that still occur. Also, users with
advanced levels of social media literacy may only experience positive emotions in these
situations as they are able to focus on the scarce positive aspects of these (undesirable)
behaviors and contents (Buunk, Collins, Taylor, VanYperen, & Dakof, 1990). Additionally,
when users display behaviors or interact with content which inherently triggers positive
effects, these effects may be even stronger among social media literate users as their
elaborated cognitive and affective structures constantly help them to maximize their
social media experiences.

Assumption 2. Social media literacy as a predictor. The DSMM (Valkenburg & Peter, 2013)
describes that the same factors that moderate relations between media use and well-
being, may also affect how often a user is exposed to media messages in the first place.
Accordingly, we assume that social media literacy as a predictor shapes social media
content preferences, i.e., exposure to social media content of others and one’s own social
media behavior.

   Considering exposure, social media literate users are likely to be less exposed to
potentially adverse content than non-literate users. This manifests itself at two different
levels. First, drawing on media selection theory (Klapper, 1960), social media literate users
selectively chose from whom they view social media content. They critically evaluate the
persons to whom they connect and mainly include peers and other known individuals
instead of strangers (Trepte & Reinecke, 2011). Therefore, their chances to come across
potentially harmful messages are much smaller (e.g., Lup, Trub, & Rosenthal, 2015).
   Second, even though users control whom is included in their online network, research
suggests that the distinctive attributes of social media platforms still imply that “the
                                                        JOURNAL OF CHILDREN AND MEDIA         325


content that people view in their social media feeds is largely outside of individual
control” (Vraga, Bode, & Troller-Renfree, 2016, p. 150). Therefore, unlike with traditional
media consumption, the predictive power of social media literacy lies only partly in the
selective non-exposure to content (Klapper, 1960) and manifests itself further at the level
of attention processes. In this context, users contribute variable attention in function of
how optimal the messages are; social media literate users intentionally pay little attention
to potentially harmful content and more attention to potentially beneficial messages as
they understand how they can be negatively vs positively affected by viewing certain
posts (Vraga et al., 2016).
   Considering one’s own social media behavior, social media literate users are believed
to engage in the social media environment relying on their elaborated cognitive and
affective structures. Again, this manifests itself at two different levels. First, these users are
well aware of the people that have access to their profile entries. As explained above, they
mainly connect with known individuals and limit strangers’ access (Trepte & Reinecke,
2011). Moreover, as they know that not all content types are equally appropriate among
different audiences (e.g., friends, family and professional relations), they apply advanced
privacy control settings which limit the visibility of certain posts to specific connections
(Trepte & Reinecke, 2011). Consequently, social media literate users are much less likely to
be negatively affected.
   Second, users’ level of social media literacy shapes the messages they share. Unlike
with traditional media, social media users are constantly enabled to create, edit and share
content themselves (Tsitsika et al., 2014). By drawing on media selection theory (Klapper,
1960), social media users are likely to carefully monitor the content they create and post in
order to obtain wished-for beneficial emotions. Accordingly, these users succeed in
balancing the need to share content, which helps accrue the benefits of social media
usage, and the need to control this content, which minimizes the privacy risks related to
sharing personal information online (Trepte & Reinecke, 2011).

Development
By applying an ecological perspective (Bronfenbrenner & Morris, 2006), the SMILE-model
argues that social media literacy develops through interactions between a person and his/
her environment. Within this environment, several agents play an important role and do
not exclusively refer to educators (i.e., formal agents) but also account for peers and family
members (i.e., informal agents). As the literature traditionally considers formal agents and
seems to position these agents as fundamentally different from family and peer socializa­
tion, a scholarly debate has taken place on how to understand different sources of
people’s (social) media literacy (Hobbs, 2011). The SMILE-model intends to help this
debate move forward by arguing that both formal and informal agents contribute to
social media literacy and conceptualizes a novel process labelled “the participatory
mediation of social media literacy.”
   The process of participatory mediation is rooted within the autonomy-supportive
parental mediation literature (Valkenburg, Piotrowski, Hermanns, & de Leeuw, 2013)
and media literacy theory (Potter, 2004). High participatory mediation is received when
an agent and an individual actively discuss social media topics in a way that helps the
individual (a) to understand its potential effects and (b) be in control of adopting desirable
affective responses when using social media. Importantly, the agent acknowledges the
326      L. SCHREURS AND L. VANDENBOSCH


person’s thoughts and feelings during these active discussions. Low participatory media­
tion occurs when the agent transfers cognitive, and thereby also affective structures
without any interaction. Participatory mediation can thus be considered on
a continuum including more or less interactions between the agent and the individual.
Based on self-determination theory (Deci & Ryan, 1985), many interactions between the
agent and the individual, in which the individual’s perspective is actively taken into
account, results in a better internalization of the received social media literacy structures.
    To understand how participatory mediation relates to the development of social
media literacy, the SMILE-model theorizes reciprocal, conditional and differential learn­
ing processes. Similar processes can occur for the development of more traditional
forms of media literacy, yet the current paper aims to foreground social media peculia­
rities in each.

Assumption 3: Reciprocal processes. The relations between participatory mediation pro­
cesses and social media literacy development are assumed to be reciprocal. An agent may
mediate social media literacy among people. At the same time, when these people
actively participate and exert agency in their development (Grusec & Hastings, 2015),
their responses to this mediation may shape future mediation messages received from
the agent. Such reciprocal relations are drawn from Bandura’s social cognitive theory
(2001), but also are theorized in models such as the family systems framework (Broderick,
1993) and are especially likely to occur for high levels of participatory mediation. During
active discussions, the messages of both members are likely to affect each other positively
(Vandenbosch, 2018).

Assumption 4: Conditional processes. Bandura’s model (2001) and socialization literature
(Grusec & Hastings, 2015) suggest that generally, different agents in the environment do
not influence people as separate entities but operate simultaneously and may strengthen
or weaken each other. Accordingly, it is believed that the development of social media
literacy depends on the impact of one agent interacting with the influence of other
agents. Such interactive processes have also been suggested for traditional media literacy
as scholars have for instance argued that when educators and parents both promote
media literacy, stronger skills are developed (Chakroff & Nathanson, 2011).

Assumption 5: Differential learning processes. Finally, the model assumes that, depending
on which agent is involved in the participatory mediation (e.g., educator, family member
or peer), people develop different social media literacy competencies through differential
types of learning processes (i.e., qualification and socialization). Following education
literature (Biesta, 2006), we argue to distinguish between qualification and socialization
agents. Through qualification, people acquire more formal social media literacy compe­
tencies. A prime example of an important qualification agent is an educator. Educators are
typically teachers for young people, or researchers for older people, who deliver a formal
media literacy intervention (Xie et al., 2019). During such an intervention, educators
instruct on how to understand and evaluate media messages (Vahedi et al., 2018).
A substantial number of intervention studies have shown that such intensive formal
training increases general media knowledge and critical thinking skills (Jeong et al.,
2012; Vahedi et al., 2018).
                                                     JOURNAL OF CHILDREN AND MEDIA        327


    Such interventions focus on low participatory mediation processes as these are often
delivered in a one-to-many format and therefore do not leave room for active discussions.
Also, they typically provide a highly valuable foundation to develop strong cognitive
structures as educators are trained to accurately inform their audience. Such interventions
are often very intense – with time being carefully devoted to instruct.
    However, there are also several downsides related to educator-based interventions.
First, following literature on emotion regulation development (Morris, Silk, Steinberg,
Myers, & Robinson, 2007), educators are less likely than other agents (e.g., peers and
family members) to stimulate affective structures. The learning of (adaptive) emotion
regulation capabilities often occurs while experiencing emotions or by modeling other
people’s strategies after observing them in social media interactions (Morris et al., 2007).
As it is unlikely that a person experiences strong emotions related to social media usage
during a formal intervention or models the educator’s own strategies to regulate emo­
tions, educators are not suitable agents to mediate affective structures of social media
literacy.
    Second, the effects of these interventions are highly likely to fade in time. Priming
literature argues that the lasting effect of a prime on a targeted behavior/thought/
emotion is a product of its frequency and recency (Roskos-Ewoldsen, Roskos-Ewoldsen, &
Dillman Carpentier, 2002). In this view, participatory mediation processes that occur
regularly and are close in time to people’s social media behavior are most likely to
stimulate the acquirement of social media literacy. Yet, as social media is normally not
used during the formal educator-based intervention (i.e., recency), and as these interven­
tions are often highly intensive but occur only once (i.e., frequency), the cognitive
structures are not developed strongly enough to be chronically accessible. Furthermore,
educators, who typically use a protective approach to convert (social) media literacy
messages, could face resistance as their approach often neglects users’ own beliefs
about- and emotional engagement with (social) media (Hobbs, 2011). This might hold
especially true in a classroom setting in which young (social) media users resist the
mediation messages received from their teachers.
    Through socialization, people develop social media literacy more informally as they
would acquire the knowledge/skills within the context of being/becoming a member of
a social group. A prime example of such a socialization agent is peers. Especially young
people attach considerable importance to the knowledge and values peers pass on to
them. Therefore, peers are known to be the most important socialization agents in their
lives (Grusec & Hastings, 2015). Participatory mediation processes through peers (both
low and high) provide individuals firstly with knowledge on different types of social media
effects. People may informally transfer social media knowledge they acquired themselves
to their friends. Also, peers may indirectly mediate affective structures. Emotion regulation
theory explains that regulation strategies are learned by observing how others control
particular emotions (Morris et al., 2007). As peers are the most straightforward agents to
experience negative and positive emotions due to social media usage in the presence of
an individual, this individual might learn to regulate one’s own emotions by observing
how peers deal with theirs.
    Peer mediation strategies are expected to have (relatively) strong effects in terms of
frequency and recency. First, peers are likely to regularly discuss social media and related
emotions among each other (Yau & Reich, 2018). Accordingly, people receive many (low
328      L. SCHREURS AND L. VANDENBOSCH


or high participatory) mediation messages from peers (i.e., frequency). Also, these media­
tion messages seem to occur very close to the moment when social media literacy is
actually needed as social media effects and related emotions can be discussed among
peers while browsing their social media feeds (i.e., recency). Moreover, as people perceive
peers as valuable information sources (Grusec & Hastings, 2015), they are less likely to
resist mediation messages coming from peers. However, the quality of peers’ participatory
mediation highly depends on peers’ own social media literacy level. It could be, for
instance, that peers with less elaborated levels give incorrect information or adopt
maladaptive emotion regulation strategies when engaging with social media content
themselves.
    Lastly, family members are argued to mediate social media literacy amongst each
other. On the one hand, parents can mediate social media literacy among their children.
Specifically, they can take up both the role of a qualification and a socialization agent. The
literature argues that parents can, similar to educators, qualify social media literacy (e.g.,
Daneels & Vanwynsberghe, 2017). For instance, by formally providing social media knowl­
edge, they may stimulate a critical disposition towards social media. Moreover, as parents
intentionally “teach” adaptive emotion regulation strategies (Morris et al., 2007), they are
also likely to qualify affective social media literacy structures.
    Some scholars question if parents have the same potential as trained educators to
properly qualify media literacy competences (see for instance Hobbs, 2011). Accordingly,
parents could also take up a more socializing role. In this interpretation, they could
likewise provide their children with knowledge on social media effects. This transferred
knowledge, however, is not guaranteed to be “right” if, for instance, parents are less active
social media users. Parents could also mediate affective structures; they could adopt more
informal practices such as talking about experienced negative emotions and could help
making sense of them. Consequently, children may learn to use their social media literacy
knowledge to adaptively regulate their emotions when engaging with social media.
    On the other hand, children are just as likely as their parents to be mediation agents of
social media literacy. In this case, they mediate their parents’ level of social media literacy.
First, children can qualify their social media knowledge to their parents. As they often
have more practical social media knowledge, they intentionally teach their less informed
and skilled parents how to use social media platforms (e.g., Correa, Straubhaar, Chen, &
Spence, 2015). Yet, children can also take up a more socializing role. Children explain to
their parents how they should interact within these platforms and which behaviors are
thought appropriate (Van den Bulck, Custers, & Nelissen, 2016). Children have less
potential to mediate affective social media literacy structures, though. Parents are less
likely to seek advice from their children when facing negative emotions, they rather turn
to other agents (e.g., life partner or a friend).


An application of the SMILE-model: the positivity bias and adolescents’
social media literacy
Build-in platform features of social media (e.g., automatically showing picture-enhancing
filters when posting a picture) facilitate the construction of positive content and thus the
participation in the positivity bias (Boyd & Ellison, 2008; Sheldon & Bryant, 2016; Walther,
Van Der Heide, Ramirez, Burgoon, & Pena, 2015). Participation in the positivity bias on
                                                       JOURNAL OF CHILDREN AND MEDIA        329


social media can be defined as the extent to which social media users strategically post self-
related content which is typically highly selective, curated and unspontaneous as the goal of
a positive self-presentation prevails over other goals of social media usage. A typical example
of an unspontaneous post is someone who organizes a photoshoot of himself/herself
with the sole purpose of selecting a good picture to post on social media. Often, the
selected picture is curated or manipulated before being posted on social media. The social
media post in which the selected and curated picture is featured is labelled to be
unspontaneous.
    A positivity bias in social media content especially occurs when presenting oneself on
the platform to a larger audience as opposed to social media interactions with close
friends (Yau & Reich, 2018). The attractiveness of posting positively biased content is
usually explained in the literature by the well-known theory of Goffman (1959). Goffman
argued that individuals are intuitively concerned about how others perceive them and
thus try to strategically manage and influence these perceptions. Especially adolescents
are considered to take part in such impression management behavior as such behavior
relates to their developmental needs. Adolescents are more dependent on peers than
other developmental groups and are preoccupied with building a personal identity
(Subrahmanyam & Šmahel, 2011). In line with this reasoning, adolescents frequently use
social media to present themselves to peers in a favorable way (e.g., Yau & Reich, 2018).
    Because of the daily confrontations with the positivity bias and adolescents’ develop­
mental needs, social media literacy in this area may be particularly relevant. The pre­
viously presented definition of social media literacy implies that social media literate
adolescents understand the implications of (positively) presenting oneself in social media
environments. Moreover, they have cognitive and affective structures to handle the
effects of the positivity bias. Drawing on the SMILE-model and literature on the positivity
bias, the mechanisms explaining how social media literacy empowers adolescents and
develops among them in regards of the positivity bias are described below. Several
testable predictions follow from the integration of the literature that may be useful for
future research.


Social media literacy and the empowerment process
Walther et al. (2015) noticed that users who exclusively received online positive informa­
tion about another user were more likely to idealize this user. Festinger (1954) adds that
exposure to idealization is typically followed by social comparison processes. Such
upward comparisons result in either self-improvement motivations or negative self-
effect. Self-improvement motivations typically occur for people who strongly feel in
control over their personal outcomes (Buunk et al., 1990). As these people believe they
can improve themselves and/or avoid failures, upward comparisons are not threatening
for their self-views. Instead comparisons are very likely to be experienced as inspiring
(Buunk et al., 1990; Buunk & Gibbons, 2007).
   As feeling in control over one’s social media experiences is characteristic for social
media literate users, the SMILE-model (assumption 1) argues that social media literacy
determines which outcomes will occur resulting from comparison processes. Particularly,
social media literate users are expected to be able to use the positively biased content as
a source of inspiration and may find a healthy dose of goodwill to improve oneself when
330      L. SCHREURS AND L. VANDENBOSCH


using social media (Meier & Schäfer, 2018). Consequently, upward comparison processes
with positively biased presented users merely result in positive affect (Buunk & Gibbons,
2007) which maximizes the positive experience of exposure. Moderate literate social
media users are specifically expected to try to adaptively control negative emotions,
such as jealousy and envy, resulting from upward comparison processes. For the other
least literate users, the comparisons may negatively affect their self-views as they are less
in control of their social media experiences.
   Furthermore, social media literate adolescents will progress their own positively biased
self-posting behaviors differently. Self-perception theory postulates that self-effects occur
because people derive particular self-concepts from prior behavior (Bem, 1972). If the
derived self-concepts are in line with (or only mildly deviate from) their current self-
concept, individuals are theorized to maximize the strength of the consistency between
those two self-concepts. This can be done by adapting their subsequent behaviors,
cognitions and beliefs (Valkenburg, 2017). If the derived self-concepts deviate from
one’s true self-concept, a discrepancy will occur and trigger adverse consequences,
such as a lowered self-esteem and depressed feelings (Higgins, 1987).
   In general, the literature has shown that adolescents who do not act true to themselves
in their day-to-day interactions are much more likely to experience harmful identity
discrepancies (Harter, 1997) and that such problems are more severe for adolescents
who are not able to adaptively control their behaviors and emotions (Harter, Marold,
Whitesell, & Cobbs, 1996). Similarly, social media research has found that young adults
who are experiencing emotional instability – and are thus unable to adaptively control
emotions – are more frequently engaging in online false self-presentations (Michikyan,
Dennis, & Subrahmanyam, 2015) which may result in negative well-being consequences
(Gil-Or, Levi-Belz, & Turel, 2015).
   According to this literature, the social media literacy definition (see section) and the
SMILE-model, social media literate adolescents are expected to post a “best version” of
themselves online, but this version will still be in line with whom they truly are. As a result,
they feel even more positive about themselves over time (see the research of Reinecke
and Trepte (2014) for initial support on this reasoning). The reverse can be expected for
less social media literate adolescents as they could easily experience an identity discre­
pancy because their positively biased content does not reflect their true selves. As these
less literate persons are also not able to adaptively control the negative emotions that
come along with the identity discrepancies, negative well-being outcomes are triggered.
   Although social media literate adolescents may also post (highly) biased content, the
SMILE-model expects this is rather unlikely (assumption 2). As social media literate users
know how extremely biased self-presentations could negatively affect oneself, they
proficiently construct a self-presentation which reflects for the most part their natural
self. These self-presentations can to some extent be a reflection of a better version of the
self in order to boost positive affect and self-confidence.
   Also, posting positively biased content online inherently involves sharing personal
information. In this context, “the nature and the publicity of disclosed personal informa­
tion has to be co-interpreted as a psychological trade-off between ‘the need to be seen’
and the awareness of possible privacy issues” (Trepte & Reinecke, 2011, p. 185). In other
words, social media literate users know that they will not be able to get all benefits out of
their social media experiences when posting too little positive information whereas
                                                       JOURNAL OF CHILDREN AND MEDIA        331


posting too much information brings along enormous privacy risks. Therefore, social
media literate users are capable of pondering the opportunities and risks of positive
online self-presentations and to make use of different strategies to achieve a precarious
balance in this regard. These users probably avoid sharing information that includes
privacy risks (e.g., leaving for a holiday) and rather share indirect personal details (e.g.,
disclosing that one is passionate about travelling) (Trepte & Reinecke, 2011).
   Moreover, social media literate adolescents may differently select social media content.
By limiting their connections to strangers, these adolescents protect themselves in a first
step from potential negative effects of positively biased content. Research has suggested
that positive posts from strangers are especially likely to trigger adverse upward compar­
ison processes (de Vries, Möller, Wieringa, Eigenraam, & Hamelink, 2018). Yet, avoiding
content of strangers will not be sufficient to avoid exposure to the positivity bias, as a vast
number of social media users present themselves in a highly positive light (e.g., Yau &
Reich, 2018). As social media literate adolescents understand how such imagery can
negatively affect them, they are expected to make the conscious decision to spend little
attention on such posts (Vraga et al., 2016).


Social media literacy and the development process
Contemporary literature on the positivity bias has highly neglected how literacy regarding
this bias is developed. The SMILE-model’s assumptions and the literature on interactions
about social media topics may help to understand how such processes develop. This
literature suggests that adolescents discuss the positivity bias with different agents in
their environment (Fant, Schreurs, & Vandenbosch, 2019; Yau & Reich, 2018), yet research
has mainly illustrated the existence of peer discussion about this topic. This gap is
somewhat surprising as researchers have explicitly recommended parents and educators
to discuss the positivity bias with children (van Driel, Pouwels, Beyens, Keijsers, &
Valkenburg, 2019). The SMILE-model highlights that not all agents have the same poten­
tial to mediate social media literacy (assumption 5).
    Peers seem the most promising agents as they, more than any other agent, function as
experts in this area (Yau & Reich, 2018). Research has indicated that adolescents are highly
aware of other peers struggling with exposure to and the self-posting of positively biased
content (Verlinden, Schreurs, & Vandenbosch, 2019). Moreover, some peers are seen as
highly knowledgeable in this area and are even explicitly consulted for advice on social
media behavior. Also, adolescents indicate to share emotions that have been triggered by
the positivity bias with peers and thus it can be expected they learn emotion regulation
strategies from their peers (Verlinden et al., 2019). Yet, peers’ potential as a successful
mediation agent depends on the accuracy and correctness of their own social media
literacy.
    In this sense, the participatory mediation messages of educators are more likely to
transfer correct and accurate information on positivity bias effects. The study of McLean,
Paxton, and Wertheim (2016) indeed showed that an educator-based intervention on
positively biased appearance-related content increased cognitive media literacy skills.
However, this type of mediation is expected to be rather short-term in nature according to
the SMILE model.
332      L. SCHREURS AND L. VANDENBOSCH


    In one of the rare studies on parents (Fant et al., 2019), only a small number of the
adolescent interviewees indicated that their parents actively taught them positivity bias
knowledge. Presumably, that is due to parents’ limited literacy in this area. Parents are less
likely to invest in online impression management behavior as such behavior is less
prevalent among older people (e.g., Dhir, Pallesen, Torsheim, & Andreassen, 2016).
Sharenting research also showed that parents have limited positivity bias understandings.
Parents often post child-related content which is found embarrassing by the child and
even harmful for his/her online identity (Verswijvel, Walrave, Hardies, & Heirman, 2019).
    Consequently, children may strongly feel they are more expert in this area than their
parents and therefore, it seems much more likely that children teach their parents
positivity bias knowledge. Such processes are often referred to in the literature as the
child-effect (Van den Bulck et al., 2016). In support of this, research shows that children
sometimes instruct their parents on the appropriateness of social media posts (Fant et al.,
2019). Such child mediation messages may result in novel cognitive structures among
parents. Subsequently, the increased literacy may make parents more insightful in their
children’s positively biased content and as a result, they are more likely to stimulate social
media literacy among their children. This example illustrates how reciprocal processes
could take place in the development of social media literacy (assumption 3).
    Moreover, the SMILE model expects that this mediational impact will be dependent on
the interaction with other agents (assumption 4). Indeed, research shows adolescents
frequently discuss the positivity bias with peers (Yau & Reich, 2018) and, to a lesser extent,
with educators. The congruence between the different discussions will determine the
extent to which literacy will be developed. For instance, the impact of an active classroom
discussion about how to control jealousy when being exposed to positively biased
Instagram images may be heightened/reduced when an adolescent encounters similar/
opposite messages coming from valued peers.


Directions for future research
Given the ubiquity of social media (Anderson & Jiang, 2018), it is surprising that no
attempts were made to formulate a role for social media literacy in users’ well-being.
The SMILE-model, as a first guiding framework for social media literacy, addresses such
fundamental shortcomings in media literacy and media effects literature by modeling an
empowering and a development process of social media literacy. As the model connects
two subfields in communication studies that have seldom been related before, it may
contribute to the fast-developing field of social media literacy in several important ways.
   Particularly, future research drawing on the SMILE-model will reveal whether the
inclusion of social media literacy increases the power of the social media/well-being
model to explain negative and positive outcomes among users. Moreover, such research
will tackle the underexplored, mutually influencing mediation processes of several agents
in the development of social media literacy. It will be disclosed whether a dynamic and
interactive approach towards multiple agents allows for a more detailed understanding of
the complex learning of social media literacy.
   Importantly, research that addresses these novel matters should consider different
research designs. Qualitative research could, for instance, provide some first insights
about the present cognitive and affective structures when young users engage in different
                                                          JOURNAL OF CHILDREN AND MEDIA       333


social media areas and how they develop such structures. Such insights will be particularly
helpful to construct new measurement instruments for social media literacy and social
media behaviors which are needed in survey research. Other research designs may also
prove useful to gain a deeper understanding of several assumptions of the framework. For
instance, eye-tracking research could discover the amount of attention social media literate
users pay to harmful vs beneficial social media content (i.e., assumption 2).
    Notably, some groups of people may be more likely than others to develop social
media literacy and to use these structures when interacting with social media. For
example, a strong need for cognition (Cacioppo & Petty, 1982) would facilitate the
development of cognitive structures when receiving mediation messages. Future
research should carefully consider such important individual differences when exploring
the model assumptions.
    Finally, the field of traditional media literacy has typically been developed for young
media users as researchers but also policymakers and the public have been concerned
about the significant role of mass media in their development (Potter, 2020). The same is
likely to happen for the social media literacy field as children and adolescents are the most
intense consumers of social media (Anderson & Jiang, 2018) and social media are at the
heart of contemporary youth development. Consequently, social media seem to affect
these age groups the most profoundly (Kleemans et al., 2018; van Driel et al., 2019). In this
respect, the SMILE-model especially serves as a theoretical backdrop for scholars who are
engaged in the study of media in the lives of children and adolescents. Specifically, we
hope that the SMILE-model will spark research lines among these scholars that examine
how social media literacy can enrich the lives of these developmental groups.
    One important research line inspired by the SMILE-model concerns the rethinking of
(social) media literacy interventions. All too often, such interventions are implemented
without a previous understanding of the competencies needed to counter specific (social)
media effects. Such an understanding is the first necessary step to develop interventions
which adequately target the appropriate competencies among young social media users.


Disclosure statement
The authors declare that they have no conflict of interest.


Funding
This work was supported by the Research Foundation Flanders (FWO-Vlaanderen) under Grant
11D3119N.


Notes on contributor
Lara Schreurs is a PhD fellow of the Research Foundation Flanders (FWO) at the Leuven School for
Mass Communication Research (KU Leuven) under supervision of professor Laura Vandenbosch. Her
research interests concern the relations between adolescents’ and young adults’ (social) media use
and well-being. In her PhD-project, Lara specifically focuses on the role of social media literacy
within the social media-effects literature.
   Laura Vandenbosch is an assistant professor at the School for Mass Communication Research
(BOF-ZAP research professorship grant), KU Leuven. The relations between media and well-being
334       L. SCHREURS AND L. VANDENBOSCH


are the core subject of her research, leading to international publications in several fields including
developmental psychology, sexology, body image, social relationships and communication theory.



References
Anderson, M., & Jiang, J. (2018, May 31). Teens, social media and technology, 2018. Pew Research
   Center. http://www.pewinternet.org/2018/05/31/teens-social-media-technology-2018/
Aufderheide, P. (1993). Media literacy: A report of the national leadership conference on media literacy.
   Aspen, CO: Aspen Institute.
Austin, E. W., & Pinkleton, B. E. (2016). The viability of media literacy in reducing the influence of
   misleading media messages on young people’s decision-making concerning alcohol, tobacco,
   and other substances. Current Addiction Reports, 3, 175–181.
Bandura, A. (2001). Social cognitive theory of mass communication. Media Psychology, 3, 265–299.
Bem, D. J. (1972). Self-perception theory. In L. Berkowitz (Ed.), Advances in experimental social
   psychology (pp. 1–62). New York, NY: Academic Press.
Biesta, G. (2006). Beyond learning: Democratic education for a human future. Boulder: Paradigm
   Publishers.
Boyd, D. M., & Ellison, N. B. (2008). Social network sites: Definition, history, and scholarship. Journal of
   Computer-Mediated Communication, 13, 210–230.
Broderick, C. B. (1993). Understanding family process: Basics of family systems theory. Thousand Oaks,
   CA: Sage Publications, Inc.
Bronfenbrenner, U., & Morris, P. A. (2006). The bioecological model of human development. In
   W. Damon & R. M. Lerner (Eds.), Handbook of child psychology: Theoretical models of human
   development (pp. 793–828). New York, NY: Wiley.
Buunk, A. P., & Gibbons, F. X. (2007). Social comparison: The end of a theory and the emergence of a
   field. Organizational Behavior and Human Decision Processes, 102, 3–21.
Buunk, B. P., Collins, R. L., Taylor, S. E., VanYperen, N. W., & Dakof, G. A. (1990). The affective
   consequences of social comparison: Either direction has its ups and downs. Journal of
   Personality and Social Psychology, 59, 1238–1249.
Byrne, S. (2009). Media literacy interventions: What makes them boom or boomerang?
   Communication Education, 58, 1–14.
Cacioppo, J. T., & Petty, R. E. (1982). The need for cognition. Journal of Personality and Social
   Psychology, 42, 116–131.
Chakroff, J. L., & Nathanson, A. I. (2011). Parent and school interventions: Mediation and media
   literacy. In S. L. Calvert & B. J. R. D. Wilson (Eds.), The handbook of children, media, and development
   (pp. 552–576). Malden: Wiley-blackwell.
Correa, T., Straubhaar, J. D., Chen, W., & Spence, J. (2015). Brokering new technologies: The role of
   children in their parents’ usage of the internet. New Media & Society, 17, 483–500.
Cracco, E., Goossens, L., & Braet, C. (2017). Emotion regulation across childhood and adolescence:
   Evidence for a maladaptive shift in adolescence. European Child & Adolescent Psychiatry, 26,
   909–921.
Daneels, R., & Vanwynsberghe, H. (2017). Mediating social media use: Connecting parents’ media­
   tion strategies and social media literacy. Cyberpsychology: Journal of Psychosocial Research on
   Cyberspace, 11. doi:10.5817/CP2017-3-5
de Vries, D. A., Möller, A. M., Wieringa, M. S., Eigenraam, A. W., & Hamelink, K. (2018). Social
   comparison as the thief of joy: Emotional consequences of viewing strangers’ Instagram posts.
   Media Psychology, 21, 222–245.
Deci, E. L., & Ryan, R. M. (1985). Intrinsic motivation and self-determination in human behavior.
   New York: Plenum.
Dhir, A., Pallesen, S., Torsheim, T., & Andreassen, C. S. (2016). Do age and gender differences exist in
   selfie-related behaviours? Computers in Human Behavior, 63, 549–555.
                                                            JOURNAL OF CHILDREN AND MEDIA            335


Fant, J., Schreurs, L., & Vandenbosch, L. (2019). Familiedynamieken in sociale mediawijsheid: Een
   onderzoek naar de rol van de familiecontext in de ontwikkeling van sociale mediawijsheid bij
   adolescenten (Unpublished master’s thesis). KU Leuven, Belgium.
Festinger, L. (1954). A theory of social comparison processes. Human Relations, 7, 117–140.
Fredrickson, B. L., & Joiner, T. (2002). Positive emotions trigger upward spirals toward emotional
   well-Being. Psychological Science, 13, 172–175.
Gill, R. (2012). Media, Empowerment and the “sexualization of culture” debates. Sex Roles, 66,
   736–745.
Gil-Or, O., Levi-Belz, Y., & Turel, O. (2015). The “Facebook-self”: Characteristics and psychological
   predictors of false self-presentation on Facebook. Frontiers in Psychology, 6, 1–10.
Goffman, E. (1959). The presentation of self in everyday life. New York, NY: Anchor.
Grusec, J. E., & Hastings, P. D. (2015). Handbook of socialization: Theory and research. New York,
   London: The Guilford Press.
Harter, S. (1997). The personal self in social context: Barriers to authenticity. In R. D. Ashmore &
   L. Jussim (Eds.), Self and Identity: Fundamental issues (pp. 81–105). New York: Oxford University
   Press.
Harter, S., Marold, D. B., Whitesell, N. R., & Cobbs, G. (1996). A model of the effects of perceived
   parent and peer support on adolescent false self behavior. Child Development, 67, 360–374.
Higgins, E. T. (1987). Self-discrepancy: A theory relating self and affect. Psychological Review, 94,
   319–340.
Hobbs, R. (2011). The state of media literacy: A response to Potter. Journal of Broadcasting &
   Electronic Media, 55, 601–604.
Jeong, S., Cho, H., & Hwang, Y. (2012). Media literacy interventions: A meta-analytic review. Journal of
   Communication, 62, 454–472.
Klapper, J. T. (1960). The effects of mass communication. New York: Free Press.
Kleemans, M., Daalmans, S., Carbaat, I., & Anschütz, D. (2018). Picture perfect: The direct effect of
   manipulated Instagram photos on body image in adolescent girls. Media Psychology, 21,
   93–110.
Lang, A. (2017). Limited capacity model of motivated mediated message processing. In C. Hoffner &
   L. van Zoonen (Eds.), The international encyclopedia of media effects (pp. 1–9). Malden, MA: John
   Wiley & Sons, Inc.
Livingstone, S. (2014). Developing social media literacy: How children learn to interpret risky
   opportunities on social network sites. Communications, 39, 283–303.
Lup, K., Trub, L., & Rosenthal, L. (2015). Instagram #Instasad?: Exploring associations among
   Instagram use, depressive symptoms, negative social comparison, and strangers Followed.
   Cyberpsychology, Behavior and Social Networking, 18, 247–252.
McLean, S. A., Paxton, S. J., & Wertheim, E. H. (2016). Does media literacy mitigate risk for reduced
   body satisfaction following exposure to thin-ideal media? Journal of Youth and Adolescents, 45,
   1678–1695.
Meier, A., & Schäfer, S. (2018). The positive side of social comparison on social network sites: How
   envy can drive inspiration on Instagram. Cyberpsychology, Behavior and Social Networking, 21,
   411–417.
Michikyan, Dennis, & Subrahmanyam. (2015). Can you guess who I am? Real, ideal, and false
   self-presentation on Facebook among emerging adults. Emerging Adulthood, 3, 55–64.
Morris, A. S., Silk, J. S., Steinberg, L., Myers, S. S., & Robinson, L. R. (2007). The role of the family
   context in the development of emotion regulation. Social Development, 16, 361–388.
Palmer, C. A., Ramsey, M. A., Morey, J. N., & Gentzler, A. L. (2016). How do people share their positive
   events? Individual differences in capitalizing, bragging, and mass-sharing. Journal of Individual
   Differences, 37, 250–259.
Perloff, R. M. (2014). Social media effects on young women’s body image concerns: Theoretical
   perspectives and an agenda for research. Sex Roles, 71, 363–377.
Potter, W. J. (2004). Theory of media literacy: A cognitive approach. Thousand Oaks, CA: Sage.
Potter, W. J. (2020). Media literacy: Ninth edition. Thousand Oaks, CA: Sage.
336        L. SCHREURS AND L. VANDENBOSCH


Reinecke, L., & Trepte, S. (2014). Authenticity and well-being on social network sites: A two-wave
   longitudinal study on the effects of online authenticity and the positivity bias in SNS
   communication. Computers in Human Behavior, 30, 95–102.
Roskos-Ewoldsen, D. R., Roskos-Ewoldsen, B., & Dillman Carpentier, F. R. (2002). Media priming:
   A synthesis. In J. Bryant & D. Zillman (Eds.), Media effects: Advances in theory and research (pp.
   97–120). London: Lawrence Erlbaum Associates, Publishers.
Sheldon, P., & Bryant, K. (2016). Instagram: Motives for its use and relationship to narcissism and
   contextual age. Computers in Human Behavior, 58, 89–97.
Subrahmanyam, K., & Šmahel, D. (2011). Digital youth: The role of media in development. New York:
   Springer.
Tamplin, N., Mclean, S. A., & Paxton, S. J. (2018). Social media literacy protects against the negative
   impact of exposure to appearance ideal social media images in young adult women but not men.
   Body Image, 26, 29–37.
Trepte, S., & Reinecke, L. (2011). Privacy online: Perspectives on privacy and self-disclosure in the social
   web. New York: Springer.
Tsitsika, A. K., Tzavela, E. C., Janikian, M., Ólafsson, K., Iordache, A., Schoenmakers, T. M., . . .
   Richardson, C. (2014). Online social networking in adolescence: Patterns of use in six European
   countries and links with psychosocial functioning. Journal of Adolescent Health, 55, 141–147.
Tugade, M. M., & Fredrickson, B. L. (2007). Regulation of positive emotions: Emotion regulation
   strategies that promote resilience. Journal of Happiness Studies, 8, 311–333.
Vahedi, Z., Sibalis, A., & Sutherland, J. E. (2018). Are media literacy interventions effective at changing
   attitudes and intentions towards risky health behaviors in adolescents? A meta-analytic review.
   Journal of Adolescence, 67, 140–152.
Valkenburg, P. M. (2017). Understanding self-effects in social media. Human Communication
   Research, 43, 477–490.
Valkenburg, P. M., & Peter, J. (2013). The differential susceptibility to media effects model. Journal of
   Communication, 63, 221–243.
Valkenburg, P. M., Piotrowski, J. T., Hermanns, J., & de Leeuw, R. (2013). Developing and validating
   the perceived parental media mediation scale: A self-determination perspective. Human
   Communication Research, 39, 445–469.
Van den Bulck, J., Custers, K., & Nelissen, S. (2016). The child-effect in the new media environment:
   Challenges and opportunities for communication research. Journal of Children and Media, 10,
   30–38.
van Driel, I. I., Pouwels, J. L., Beyens, I., Keijsers, L., & Valkenburg, P. M. (2019). ‘Posten, scrollen, appen
   en snappen’: Jongeren (14–15 jaar) en social media in 2019, Center for Research on Children,
   Adolescents, and the Media (CcaM). Universiteit van Amsterdam.
Vandenbosch, L. (2018). Sexual socialization. In T. Shackelford & V. Weekes-Shackelford (Eds.),
   Encyclopedia of evolutionary psychological science (pp. 1–7). Springer, Cham.
Vanwynsberghe, H. (2014). How users balance opportunity and risk: A conceptual exploration of social
   media literacy and measurement. Ghent, Belgium: Ghent University. Faculty of Political and Social
   Sciences.
Verlinden, E., Schreurs, L., & Vandenbosch, L. (2019). Schone schijn op sociale media: Een verken­
   nend onderzoek naar de constructie van een positief vertekend beeld op sociale media en naar
   de ontwikkeling van sociale mediawijsheid bij adolescenten (Unpublished master’s thesis). KU
   Leuven, Belgium.
Verswijvel, K., Walrave, M., Hardies, K., & Heirman, W. (2019). Sharenting, is it a good or a bad thing?
   Understanding how adolescents think and feel about sharenting on social network sites. Children
   and Youth Services Review, 104, 1–10.
Vraga, E., Bode, L., & Troller-Renfree, S. (2016). Beyond self-reports: Using eye tracking to measure
   topic and style differences in attention to social media content. Communication Methods and
   Measures, 10, 149–164.
Walther, J. B., Van Der Heide, B., Ramirez, A., Burgoon, J. K., & Pena, J. (2015). Interpersonal and
   hyperpersonal dimensions of computer-mediated communication. In S. S. Sundar (Ed.), The
                                                           JOURNAL OF CHILDREN AND MEDIA          337


   handbook of the psychology of communication technology (pp. 3–23). Chichester, UK: John Wiley &
   Sons.
Walther, J. B. (2017). The merger of mass and interpersonal communication via new media:
   Integrating metaconstructs. Human Communication Research, 43, 559–572.
Wright, P. J. (2011). Mass media effects on youth sexual behavior: Assessing the claim for causality.
   Annals of the International Communication Association, 35, 343–385. doi: 10.1080/
   23808985.2011.11679121
Xie, X., Gai, X., & Zhou, Y. (2019). A meta-analysis of media literacy interventions for deviant
   behaviors. Computers & Education, 139, 146–156.
Yau, J. C., & Reich, S. M. (2018). “It’s just a lot of work”: Adolescents’ self-presentation norms and
   practices on Facebook and Instagram. Journal of Research on Adolescence, 1–14. doi:10.1111/
   jora.12376
