                                              International Journal of Disaster Risk Reduction 81 (2022) 103312



                                                           Contents lists available at ScienceDirect


                              International Journal of Disaster Risk Reduction
                                                   journal homepage: www.elsevier.com/locate/ijdrr




Investigation of social media representation bias in disasters:
Towards a systematic framework
Yudi Chen a, Song He b, *, Zhipeng Zhou a
a Department of Management Science and Engineering, College of Economics and Management, Nanjing University of Aeronautics and Astronautics,
Nanjing, 211106, PR China
b Department of Civil Engineering, College of Architecture and Civil Engineering, Wenzhou University, Wenzhou, 325035, PR China




ARTICLE INFO                                              ABSTRACT

Keywords:                                                 Due to its real-time and human-centered nature, social media posts have been widely applied to
Disaster management                                       provide rapid situational awareness in disasters, particularly from a human-centered perspective.
Bayesian-based modeling                                   To generalize social media-derived insights on a population, a pre-requisite is that the employed
Public transit                                            social media posts are capable of revealing the information of disaster-affected population with-
COVID-19
                                                          out bias. Such wide application and pre-requisite underscore the importance of investigating so-
                                                          cial media bias for deriving reliable decision support insights in disaster management. However,
                                                          a systematic framework that streamlines the investigation of social media representation bias is
                                                          still missing. To address the research gap, we propose a framework comprising (1) the setting of
                                                          an appropriate representation bias benchmark; (2) the modeling of the sampling uncertainty of
                                                          social media-derived insights; and (3) the derivation and quantification of representation bias
                                                          distribution across races/ethnicities. Public transit amid COVID-19 in the United States is studied
                                                          for illustration purposes. Nation-level results show that the White group is over-represented, the
                                                          Asian group is slightly over-represented, and the Hispanic and Black groups are under-
                                                          represented throughout the studied period. The level of social media representation bias varies
                                                          across the states of California, New York, Texas, and Florida, and it is inversely correlated with
                                                          population ratios. Such findings are beneficial for decision-makers to use social media to derive
                                                          reliable insights into disaster-affected population, thereby making informed operational deci-
                                                          sions accordingly.



1. Introduction
    As a real-time crowdsourcing information source, social media posts have been widely used in disasters for providing situational
assessment [1–3]. Through a variety of text mining techniques (e.g., topic modeling), social media posts are purposely processed to
deliver various types of decision support in disasters, ranging from the detection of emergency events [4], the assessment of disaster
impacts on the built environments [5,6], and the identification of urgent public demands [7], to name a few. Meanwhile, researchers
have also recognized that social media users are not an ideal sample of a population without bias [8–12]; consequently, social media
posts could not be directly used to estimate attributes on disaster-affected populations. For example, researchers have proved that de-
mographic information significantly affects urban human mobility patterns [13], resulting in a biased representation across popula-
tion groups. The ignorance of social media bias might lead to inappropriate decision support in disasters, such as allocating more re-
sources to the over-represented groups on social media [9]. Given the wide applications of social media in disasters, as well as the ex-

    * Corresponding author.
    E-mail addresses: ychen55@nuaa.edu.cn (Y. Chen), 20210465@wzu.edu.cn (S. He), zhouzhipeng@nuaa.edu.cn (Z. Zhou).

https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ijdrr.2022.103312
Received 28 May 2022; Received in revised form 20 August 2022; Accepted 16 September 2022
Available online 23 September 2022
2212-4209/© 2022 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.
Y. Chen et al.                                                                       International Journal of Disaster Risk Reduction 81 (2022) 103312


istence of social media representation bias, it becomes essential to systematically investigate social media bias for deriving reliable in-
sights into a disaster-affected population.
    Researchers have shown that the Twitter population is a highly non-uniform sample of the population [8,11,12]. Tweets are sub-
ject to a variety of bias types, such as the people who choose to use social media are not randomly selected from the population [14],
Twitter users have significantly different levels of posting activity rates (e.g., 80/20 Pareto principle) [14], and Twitter users with dif-
ferent demographic traits (e.g., race/ethnicity, gender, and age) behave differently [15]. All these biases have been empirically
proved in the previous studies [8,10–12,15]. For example, disaster-related human behaviors (e.g., information seeking, sharing activ-
ity, and perceptions of information reliability) are found to vary across population groups on social media [9]. In this research, social
media representation bias is defined as the demographic differences of the populations between the employed social media users and
disaster-affected population. Such a definition is reasonable because all types of the aforementioned bias are eventually presented by
the demographic differences between employed social media users and disaster-affected population.
    Given such a definition of social media representation bias, the most straightforward bias investigation method is to compare the
demographic distributions of social media users and disaster-affected population. But only a small portion of social media users put
their demographic traits in their user profiles, highlighting the requirement of utilizing intelligent methods to derive the demographic
traits. In recent years, researchers have developed multiple methods to infer the demographic traits of social media users
[8,13,16–18]. Based on their inferring principles, existing methods could be categorized into multivariate-based [16–18] and sur-
name-based methods [13,19]. Multivariate-based methods predict demographic traits by learning the correlations between a set of
variates and demographic traits, and they often require large-scale labeled datasets for training. Surname-based methods predict de-
mographic traits by comparing social media users’ surnames and the comprehensive surname database released by the US Census Bu-
reau [20]. Surname-based methods have been broadly used in practice due to their simplicity, the absence of labeling requirements,
and satisfactory performance [8]. In this research, surname-based methods are used to derive the demographic traits of social media
users.
    In addition to the prediction of social media users’ demographic traits, we need to (1) identify the affected population in a disaster
and (2) model the sampling uncertainty of social media-derived attributes, thereby comparing the demographic distributions be-
tween social media users and disaster-affected population in a reliable manner. In a disaster, social groups with different demographic
traits are affected unevenly as they have varied levels of vulnerability. Thus, to build an appropriate population benchmark, it is es-
sential to identify the composition of a disaster-affected population. Regarding the sampling uncertainty modeling, social media users
are a sample of a population [21], and consequently, social media-derived insights on that population are uncertain values. Such un-
certainty modeling is particularly needed in scenarios with small numbers of disaster-related social media posts. Building on these
aforementioned requirements and challenges, we propose a systematic framework that is capable of (1) predicting the demographic
traits of social media users; (2) modeling the sampling uncertainty of social media-derived population ratios through a Bayesian-
based method; (3) quantifying social media representation bias by taking disaster-affected population as the benchmark; and (4) ex-
ploring the temporal and regional trends of social media representation bias. Compared to the methodologies used in previous studies
[8,11,12], the proposed framework systematically streamlines the steps required for representation bias investigation. In this frame-
work, an external benchmark is built based on the affected population in a disaster, the sampling uncertainty of social media-derived
attributes on disaster-affected population is modeled, and finally, social media representation bias is quantified by the population dis-
tribution differences across demographic traits.
    The global COVID-19 pandemic has resulted in serious, long-lasting impacts on many societal aspects in the United States, espe-
cially for public transit systems that have suffered significant ridership loss. Meanwhile, social media platforms play an increasingly
important role in public transit operations, as they provide rapid and two-way communications between operation agencies and the
public. Given such severe impacts and the critical role of social media in public transit operations, we study public transit amid
COVID-19 in US as a case study to illustrate the proposed framework, as well as to provide the context for the presented research. Re-
sults show that the Black and Hispanic groups are under-represented, the White group is over-represented, and the Asian group is
slightly over-represented during the analysis period between mid-August and late October 2021. Social media representation bias
also varies across the studied states (i.e., NY, CA, TX, and FL), and the level of social media representation bias is found to be inversely
correlated with population ratios.
    The remainder of this study is organized as follows. First, a literature review section is introduced to present the wide applications
of social media data in disaster management, underscoring the significance of social media representation bias investigation; the liter-
ature on Bayesian-based sampling uncertainty modeling is also presented to highlight the methodological contributions of this study.
Second, details of the proposed framework are presented. Third, the distribution and overview of social media representation bias are
presented, and the patterns of representation bias are explored and summarized. Last, research contributions, limitations, and poten-
tial future work are discussed and concluded.

2. Literature review
2.1. Social media data-driven decision support in disasters
    Social media data has been broadly used to enhance situational awareness in disaster relief [9,15,22,23], providing timely and hu-
man-centered decision support. Based on their decision support focuses, existing studies could be grouped as human-focused
[1,9,13,22–24]; and built environment-focused [2,5,6,15,25–28]. The public has extensively used social media to communicate dis-
aster-related news and opinions, and such information reflects disaster-related human behaviors. Researchers have conducted various
human-focused studies to investigate the social and mental aspects of human behavior in disasters [1,22,23,29]. For example, the

                                                                     2
Y. Chen et al.                                                                              International Journal of Disaster Risk Reduction 81 (2022) 103312


temporal trends and spatial patterns of post-disaster public sentiment have been explored to assess the social resilience of communi-
ties [1] and the urgency of relief resources [25]. In contrast to human-focused studies, built environment-focused studies utilize social
media data to assess built environment disruptions, such as infrastructure failure [2,5,26]. The near-real-time crowdsourcing nature
of social media makes it exceptionally promising to obtain insights on disaster-impacted built environments which requires rapid and
effective restorations following disasters. For example, researchers have used social media data to assess disaster impacts on electric-
ity infrastructure [26] and to indicate the severity of road transportation disruptions [5].
    In summary, the aforementioned studies promote the utilization of social media for providing decision support in disaster manage-
ment. But in these studies, there is an inherent assumption that social media users ideally represent the disaster-affected population
without bias; such an assumption is inconsistent with the reality wherein social media users are a biased sample of disaster-affected
population. With a few exceptions, researchers have explored the social media representation bias, but the employed benchmark is
the entire population [7], which is not appropriate as social groups are affected differently by a certain disaster. In this presented
study, we build a reliable representation bias benchmark by identifying the affected populations taking public transit amid COVID-19,
thereby conducting an objective and accurate investigation of social media representation bias.

2.2. Bayesian-based sampling uncertainty modeling
    Practitioners often use sample data to estimate a population's attributes as experiments on a sample set are feasible, cost-effective,
and time-efficient. In this context, the estimated population's attributes are uncertain values. Uncertainty level depends on sample
size: a large sample size leads to a low uncertainty level, and vice versa. Social media users are a sample of the entire population. Due
to the openness of social media platforms and their wide adoptions by the public, researchers are capable of collecting large social me-
dia datasets, but the collected large dataset is the collection of small datasets with various specific conditions [30]. For example, there
are only around three thousands of electricity-related tweets in Hurricane Irma among the over one million disaster-related tweets
[26]. Therefore, it is essential to include the sampling uncertainty to reliably indicate a population's behavior using social media.
    Bayesian-based methods are often developed to model uncertainty by combining two types of information: prior knowledge and
new observations [31]. The prior knowledge is usually obtained from expert experience or historical data, and the new observations
refer to newly observed instances. By doing so, it is expected to obtain reliable uncertainty modeling in both small dataset and large
dataset scenarios. For small dataset scenarios, prior knowledge dominates the uncertainty modeling, and for large dataset scenarios,
new observations could be used to update the uncertainty constantly. In practice, uncertainty is commonly characterized by proba-
bilistic functions determined based on the characteristics of interest attributes. For example, ratio-like metrics, such as positive senti-
ment ratio and demand rate, are often characterized by Beta, Binomial, Dirichlet, and Multinomial distributions [7,25]. Researchers
model the fraction non-conforming using the Beta distribution and Binomial distribution, wherein the Binomial distribution is used to
model the uncertainty of new observations, and the Beta distribution is used to model the prior [32]. Similar to the fraction non-
conforming, researchers have used the Beta and Binomial distribution to model demand ratio following disasters using social media
[7].
    Building on the aforementioned analysis and the previous successes in Bayesian-based modeling, we will develop a Bayesian-
based approach to model the sampling uncertainty of the population ratios using a sample population set, such as social media users
or survey respondents.

3. Methodology
    To reliably investigate social media representation bias, the presented study proposes a systematic framework containing the mod-
ules of data collection, population ratio modeling, and representation bias distribution and overview, as shown in Fig. 1. In the data
collection module, we collect public transit-related social media data and surveys. The surveys are processed to obtain the public tran-
sit-affected population amid COVID-19 in US. In the population ratio modeling module, the races/ethnicities of social media users are
predicted, and the composition of the public transit-affected population is calculated. Given that both social media users and surveys
are samples of the affected population, a Bayesian-based approach is developed to model the sampling uncertainty. In the representa-
tion bias distribution and overview module, we derive the representation bias distribution across races/ethnicities, and a distance-
based metric is used to provide an overview of the representation bias.
    Because of the COVID-19 pandemic, public transit ridership in the United States dropped by nearly 80% in April 2020 compared
to 2019 and by over 60% each month throughout the rest of the year [33]. To design human-centered countermeasures for reversing
ridership decrease, decision-makers need to perceive transit-related public opinion rapidly. In this context, social media data is an




                                  Fig. 1. The proposed investigation framework of social media representation bias.

                                                                         3
Y. Chen et al.                                                                             International Journal of Disaster Risk Reduction 81 (2022) 103312


ideal information source to derive useful insights for timely decision support in public transit policymaking. But to use social media
data in a reliable manner, one must first investigate its representation bias on public transit subjects to make unbiased decisions.
Given such practical significance, social media representation bias related to public transit amid COVID-19 is studied to illustrate the
proposed framework.

3.1. Data collection
3.1.1. Public transit-related social media data
    In this research, Twitter, a widely adopted social media platform, is used to collect public transit-related posts (i.e., ‘Tweets’) be-
cause of its support for conveniently collecting large-scale datasets through multiple built-in application programming interfaces
(API). To ensure collected Tweets are related to COVID-19 and public transit, we employed two sets of keyword filters in the Twitter
streaming API. The first set of keywords includes “covid”, “pandemic”, “covid-19”, “covid19”, and “coronavirus”, while the second set
includes “transit”, “bus”, “subway”, “metro”, and “transportation”. Tweets that do not contain keywords from both sets are filtered
out. The collection period spans approximately ten weeks, from early August to late November 2021, during which time the transit
ridership was in the process of slow recovery. In addition, Twitter users with higher posting frequencies (>50) in the collection pe-
riod are removed as these users are usually media accounts.
    Based on the objective of this study, collected tweets need to be firstly screened to select those posted in US. Geotags (e.g., a place
name or a pair of latitudinal and longitudinal coordinates) and Twitter user profiles are the two most common sources of location in-
formation; however, it is reported that only 1%–2% of the tweets are geotagged [6], making it an extremely limited source. Therefore,
to secure a sufficient number of location-known Tweets, the registered location in the Twitter user profile is also used, assuming that
the locations of the Tweets are the same as the registered locations of respective Twitter users. By doing so, a total of 45,487 Tweets
posted in US were selected for representation bias investigation. The states hosting the largest numbers of Tweets are California
(5,922 Tweets), New York (6,878 Tweets), Texas (2,437 Tweets), and Florida (1,999 Tweets).

3.1.2. Public transit-related surveys
    In this study, the population affected by public transit policies amid COVID-19 is identified through officially published trans-
portation-related surveys. The US Census Bureau has conducted the large-scale Household Pulse Survey (HPS) program to measure
social and economic impacts amid COVID-19, and transportation-related surveys were included in Phase 2. The conduction and dis-
semination intervals of HPS are two weeks, and Table 1 shows the start and end dates for five of those periods. It is worth noting that
HPS continues to name these periods “weeks” to maintain consistency with Phase 1, and we also adopt the same protocol in this
study.
    The transportation-related surveys in the HPS indicate if respondents substitute their typical in-person work for telework because
of COVID-19. The transportation-related surveys are presented at both nation- and state-level and grouped by each demographic trait
(e.g., race/ethnicity, age, and household income). For illustration purposes, transportation-related surveys at the nation-level
grouped by race/ethnicity are presented in Table 2. The “No” column shows those who did not switch to telework amid COVID-19, in-
dicating that the respondents still need to take certain transportations for their in-person work. Public transit is one of the main forms
of transportation, and we assume that the main populations affected by public transit policies are from the populations doing in-
person work. As a result, the affected population composition is calculated based on the information from the “No” column (see Sec-
tion 3.2.2).

3.2. Population ratio modeling
   The population distributions of social media users across races/ethnicities also need to be derived to compare against their coun-
terparts for representation bias investigation. Given that social media users and survey respondents are sample sets of the affected
population, a Bayesian-based approach is adopted to account for the sampling uncertainty.




Table 1
Collection and dissemination periods of HPS in Phase 2 (Year of 2021).

 Week                       13                          14                    15                     16                          17

 Start date                 Aug. 19th                   Sep. 2nd              Sep. 16th              Sep. 30th                   Oct. 14th
 End date                   Sep. 1st                    Sep. 14th             Sep. 28th              Oct. 12th                   Oct. 26th


Table 2
Transportation-related survey information in Period 1 in US.

 Race/Ethnicity                  Total                       Yes              No                    No change                 Did not report

 Hispanic                        42,196,084                  11,881,165       18,520,271            8,673,938                 3,120,710
 White                           155,879,601                 57,311,751       65,755,110            25,592,103                7,220,638
 Black                           29,510,581                  7,855,937        14,307,988            5,512,918                 1,833,738
 Asian                           12,711,076                  5,709,799        4,162,641             2,245,658                 592,979


                                                                          4
Y. Chen et al.                                                                                    International Journal of Disaster Risk Reduction 81 (2022) 103312


3.2.1. User race/ethnicity prediction
    In the derivation of population distribution of public transit-related social media users, the first step is to predict Twitter users’
races/ethnicities. In this research, the surname-based approach is used for race/ethnicity prediction due to its simplicity and satisfac-
tory performance. This approach predicts race/ethnicity by relating the surname of a Twitter user profile name to the surname data-
base released by the US Census Bureau where the racial/ethnic distribution of any surname with over 100 individuals in US is avail-
able. For example, as shown in Table 3, 70.90% of US population with the surname “Smith” are categorized as White, while 23.11%,
0.89%, and 2.40% are considered Black, Asian, and Hispanic, respectively. Notably, the sum of the percentages across the four races/
ethnicities may not be equal to 1 as other minority races/ethnicities are not included because of their extremely small population
sizes.
    In the existing literature, researchers tend to predict a Twitter user's race/ethnicity only based on the largest percentage [13,19],
which might results in unreliable predictions. For example, as shown in Table 3, it is naïve to predict the race/ethnicity of a Twitter
user whose surname is “Williams” as Black, given that the percentage for the White group is also relatively high. In this research, the
whole percentage distribution across races/ethnicities is used to represent the uncertainty of the race/ethnicity information of Twit-
ter users for more reliable prediction results.

3.2.2. Affected population calculation
    As there is a large population size in US, it is nearly impossible to obtain the exact information of the affected population in a dis-
aster. In this research, sample surveys are used to indicate the distribution of the population taking public transit amid COVID-19 in
US. According to the transportation-related surveys in the HPS program, the numbers of survey respondents doing in-person work are
recorded. As social groups among races/ethnicities have varied utilization rates of public transit, it is needed to multiply a coefficient
on the numbers of respondents with in-person work for deriving the actual numbers of respondents taking public transit. According to
the report released by the American Public Transportation Association [34], the race/ethnicity composition of public transit riders
and of the population is presented in Table 4. The relative public transit utilization rate ce is calculated using Equation (1).

                 ustr e
         ce =                                                                                                                                                 (1)
                 uspr e

wherein uspr and ustr represent US population ratio and public transit population ratio, respectively. And the subscript e stands for
races/ethnicities. The White group has a relatively lower utilization rate of public transit, while the Black and Hispanic groups have a
relatively higher utilization rate. As the races/ethnicities of Pacific Islander, Multi-ethnic, and Native American have extremely small
populations, they are not included in this research. Finally, for the White, Black, Hispanic, and Asian groups, the numbers of the sur-
vey respondents riding public transit xe are derived using Equation (2).

         xe = snoe × ce                                                                                                                                       (2)

where sno is the number of survey respondents with in-person work.

3.2.3. Bayesian-based uncertainty modeling
   The Bayesian-based procedures for modeling the population ratios of Twitter users and survey respondents are similar. We will
completely introduce the population ratio modeling of Twitter users and then briefly introduce the population ratio modeling of sur-
vey respondents. The population ratio of Twitter users prt is formulated in Equation (3).




Table 3
Sample set of the percentage distributions.

 Last name                       Count                       White                     Black                    Asian                  Hispanic

 Smith                           2,442,977                   70.90%                    23.11%                   0.89%                  2.40%
 Williams                        1,625,252                   45.75%                    47.68%                   0.82%                  2.49%
 Kariuki                         28,311                      3.32%                     94.43%                   0.00%                  0.00%
 Piedra                          5098                        5.00%                     0.78%                    0.12%                  93.35%


Table 4
Race/ethnicity composition of public transit riders in US.

 Race/ethnicity             Entire population ratio (uspr)            Public transit population ratio (ustr)                  Relative utilization rate

 White                      63%                                       40%                                                     0.63
 Black                      12%                                       24%                                                     2.00
 Hispanic                   17%                                       19%                                                     1.12
 Asian                      5%                                        7%                                                      1.40
 Pacific Islander           <1%                                       2%                                                      None
 Multi-ethnic               <1%                                       1%                                                      None
 Native American            <1%                                       1%                                                      None


                                                                              5
Y. Chen et al.                                                                                         International Journal of Disaster Risk Reduction 81 (2022) 103312



                   ne
         prt e =                                                                                                                                                   (3)
                   N

where n and N represent the number of public transit-related Twitter users for race/ethnicity e and the total number of public transit-
related Twitter users, respectively. It is worth noting that prte is an uncertain variable. To reliably model such uncertainty, we use a
Bayesian-based approach that integrates prior knowledge and new social media observations. In this research, population ratios range
from zero to one, and the numbers of social media users and survey respondents for the studied races/ethnicities are categorical vari-
ables. In this context, Dirichlet distribution is used to model the prior, and Multinomial distribution is used to model the likelihood of
new social media observations, as shown in Equations (4) and (5).

                                                          1                            𝛼 −1
                                                                                                                                                                   (4)
                                                                            ∏
         p (prt) = Dir 𝛼 w , 𝛼 h , 𝛼 b , 𝛼 a =                                      prte e
                      (                     )
                                                 B 𝛼 w , 𝛼 h , 𝛼 b , 𝛼 a e∈{w,h,b,a}
                                                  (                     )


                                                                            𝛤 (∑𝑒 𝑛𝑒 +1)
         𝐿 (𝐧∣𝐩𝐫𝐭) = 𝐿 (𝑛w , 𝑛h , 𝑛b , 𝑛a |𝑝𝑟𝑡 w , 𝑝𝑟𝑡h , 𝑝𝑟𝑡b , 𝑝𝑟𝑡a ) =   ∏𝑒 𝛤(𝑛𝑒 +1)
                                                                                                  𝑛
                                                                                           ∏𝑒 𝑝𝑟𝑡𝑒 𝑒                                                               (5)

where the subscripts w,h,b,a correspond to the White, Hispanic, Black, and Asian groups, respectively. In Equation (4), B is a multi-
variate Beta function. αw,αh,αb,αa are the four shape parameters in the prior knowledge. The determination of an informative prior re-
quires profound domain expertise, which is out of the research scope. Therefore, a non-informative prior Dir(1,1,1,1) is used for illus-
tration purposes. In Equation (5), Γ is a Gamma function.
    Through such probability modeling of the prior and likelihood, the posterior of population ratios is derived with a closed analyti-
cal form, as shown in Equation (6).

                         L (n|prt) p (prt)      (                                  )
         p (prt|n) =                       = Dir 1 + nw , 1 + nh , 1 + nb , 1 + na                                                                                 (6)
                               p (n)

Notably, the parameters in the posterior are the direct summation of the parameters in the prior and the numbers of social media ob-
servations, making it convenient for continuous updating.
   Similar to the population ratio modeling of social media users, the population ratios for survey respondents are formulated in
Equation (7).

                         me
         prse =
                                                                                                                                                                   (7)
                        ∑
                                 me
                   e∈{w,h,b,a}


where m is the number of survey respondents who take public transit amid COVID-19, and it is calculated using Equation (2). Dirich-
let and Multinomial distributions are also used to model the prior and likelihood. Finally, the posterior of the population ratios of sur-
vey respondents is formulated in Equation (8).

                          L (m|prs) p (prs)      (                                  )
         p (prs|m) =                        = Dir 1 + mw , 1 + mh , 1 + mb , 1 + ma                                                                                (8)
                               p (m)

where prs = {prsw,prsh,prsb,prsa}. It is worth noting that prt is sampled through a two-stage process, wherein the first stage is used to
sample race/ethnicity information, and the second stage is used to sample population ratios from the modeled posterior in Equation
(6). In contrast, prs is obtained through directly sampling from the modeled posterior in Equation (8), as the race/ethnicity of each
survey respondent has been recorded in surveys.

3.3. Representation bias distribution and overview
   In this section, the representation bias distribution is derived to indicate if a social group is over- or under-represented and to what
extent. In addition, an overview of the social media representation bias is provided through a distance-based metric.

3.3.1. Representation bias distribution
    The social media representation bias be is indicated by subtracting population ratios of survey respondents from the population ra-
tios of Twitter users, as shown in Equation (9).

         be = prte − prse                                                                                                                                          (9)

Such a simple formula provides a straightforward indication of over- and under-representation, wherein be > 0 indicates over-
representation, while be < 0 indicates under-representation. Given that prs and prt are uncertain variables, their exact values are ran-
domly sampled from the modeled posteriors in Equations (6) and (8). To ensure a reliable indication, 1000 sets of prs and prt are
sampled for analyzing representation bias.
   To statistically indicate the differences of population distributions of social media users and survey respondents, the significance
level between the two distributions is calculated. As there are three independent variables in the population distributions, the com-



                                                                                              6
Y. Chen et al.                                                                               International Journal of Disaster Risk Reduction 81 (2022) 103312


monly used univariate significance test (e.g., Z-test) could not be directly used. In this section, we calculate the significance level
based on the overlap volume (OV) between the population distributions, as presented in Equation (10).

                        1

                   ∭0
         OV =               min (p (prt|n) , p (prs|m)) dxdydz                                                                                            (10)


A small OV represents a significant difference level and vice versa. We defined four difference levels (DL) using Equation (11).

              ⎧                (
                        Level 3 ∗ ∗ ∗) ov ≤ 0.003
              ⎪
              ⎪          Level 2 (∗∗) 0.003 < OV ≤ 0.05
         DL = ⎨                                                                                                                                           (11)
              ⎪         Level 1 (∗) 0.05 < OV ≤ 0.32
              ⎪         Not significant 0.32 < OV
              ⎩

This definition is consistent with the percentage of the values within standard deviations of the mean in a normal distribution.

3.3.2. Representation bias overview
    To provide an overview of the social media representation bias, a metric is needed to comprehensively summarize the representa-
tion bias across races/ethnicities. As race/ethnicity is a categorical variable without intrinsic ordering to the categories, the overview
metric should not change with the orders of races/ethnicities. In other words, the overview bias for any order of races/ethnicities
should remain the same. In this context, we propose a distance-based measure that is the summation of the absolute values of repre-
sentation bias, as formulated in Equation (12).
                    ∑
         d=                    |b e |
                               | |                                                                                                                        (12)
                 e∈{w,h,b,a}


It is worth noting that this overview metric ranges from 0 to 2, wherein 0 indicates there is no representation bias, while 2 represents
that social media representation is totally different from the affected population. Such a bounded ranged benefits the interpretation of
social media representation bias. In the future, a bias threshold could be set by expert knowledge to determine if the employed social
media users are representative of disaster-affected population. If yes, the social media-derived insights could be directly used to esti-
mate population attributes; otherwise, bias mitigation strategies should be used in order to derive reliable insights using social media.

4. Results
4.1. Nation-level representation bias
    Table 5 shows DL between the distributions of the affected population and the employed Twitter users. Throughout the stud-
ied weeks, the differences between the two population distributions are statistically significant with level 3 (***), which under-
scores the necessity and importance of investigating social media representation bias. In addition, the parameters of the posteri-
ors, which are Dirichlet distributions, are also presented. For the affected population distribution, the four parameters are ex-
tremely large, indicating extremely small uncertainty. Although the four parameters in the social media representation distribu-
tion are not as large as that in the affected population distribution, they could be taken as large numbers because they are
larger than 30, the threshold in the law of large numbers. Therefore, the uncertainty of population ratios of Twitter users is also
small at the nation-level.
    Fig. 2 presents the temporal trends of the social media representation bias throughout the studied weeks. For each race/ethnicity
in each week, social media representation bias is indicated in the form of boxplot to reveal the uncertainty. The uncertainty is quite
small as there are large numbers of survey respondents and Twitter users at the nation level. From the temporal perspective, the so-
cial media representation biases of the four races/ethnicities are quite stable throughout the studied weeks. Such stable nature
makes it promising to include the social media representation bias in future research planning. Regarding the representation bias
level, the White group is over-represented, the Asian group is slightly over-represented, and the Hispanic and Black groups are un-
der-represented. Such phenomena indicate that decision-makers should scale down the information from the White group while
scale up the information from the Hispanic and Black groups, thereby obtaining representative insights for the affected population.


Table 5
Difference levels of representation bias at nation-level.

 Week             Affected population dist.                                   Social media representation dist.                                      DL

                  αw                    αh           αb          αa           αw               αh                 αb               αa

 13               4.2E+7                2.1E+7       2.9E+7      5.8E+6       1.3E+3           1.1E+2             7.3E+1           7.1E+2            ***
 14               4.2E+7                2.1E+7       2.7E+7      5.7E+6       1.1E+3           8.3E+1             6.7E+1           2.2E+2            ***
 15               4.2E+7                2.1E+7       2.7E+7      5.8E+6       1.1E+3           6.7E+1             6.1E+1           1.5E+2            ***
 16               4.3E+7                2.0E+7       2.7E+7      5.5E+6       1.4E+3           8.9E+1             6.7E+1           1.5E+2            ***
 17               4.2E+7                2.0E+7       2.7E+7      5.3E+6       1.1E+3           7.0E+1             4.9E+1           1.3E+2            ***


                                                                          7
Y. Chen et al.                                                                                  International Journal of Disaster Risk Reduction 81 (2022) 103312




                                              Fig. 2. Temporal trends of representation bias at nation-level.


    The overview of social media representation bias is measured by the distance-based metric, as shown in Fig. 3. The dashed line is
the mean value of the overall representation bias throughout the studied weeks. For public transit amid the COVID-19 in US, the over-
all representation bias fluctuates around 0.75–0.82. According to Equation (12), the distance ranges from 0 to 2, wherein the distance
of 0 indicates an ideal representation, and the distance of 2 indicates an absolutely different social media representation. In this con-
text, the value ranges from 0.75 to 0.82, indicating a relatively strong social media representation bias, underscoring the importance
of removing social media representation bias in decision-making processes.

4.2. State-level representation bias
    In this section, social media representation bias is explored in the four states with the largest volumes of Tweets in US; namely, CA,
NY, TX, and FL. Temporal analysis with the distance-based measure provides the trends of social media representation bias in differ-
ent time periods. Such analysis is beneficial for decision-makers to understand representation bias in the near future, thereby design-
ing appropriate bias mitigation strategies. Fig. 4 shows the temporal trends of social media representation bias at the state level. The
temporal trends of representation bias in all four states resemble that at the nation level: they are stable throughout the studied
weeks. The uncertainty of representation bias at the state level is much larger than that at the nation level, which is reasonable as the
numbers of Twitter users and survey respondents in each state are much smaller than that at the nation level. For the White group,
there are over-representations for the four states. For the Asian group, the representation bias tends to be 0 in the states of CA and NY,
while in the states of TX and FL, there are slightly over-representations. For the Hispanic group, there are under-representations for
the four states, which is exactly opposite to that for the White group. For the Black group, there is under-representation in the states of
NY, TX, and FL, and in the state of CA, the Black group is well-represented on social media. In addition, it is worth noting that the
most over-represented group is always the White group, while the most under-represented group varies across the states. The most
under-represented group in the state of NY is the Black group, and the most under-represented group in the states of CA and TX are
the Hispanic group. Building on the aforementioned representation patterns, we claim that significant differences exist in social me-
dia representation bias across the states, especially for under-represented races/ethnicities.
    To further indicate the patterns of the social media representation bias, the correlations between the representation bias and the
affected population ratios are analyzed, as shown in Fig. 5. For each subplot, a dot represents a state; there are four points for each
race/ethnicity as four states are included in this research. For simplicity, the mean values of social media representation bias and af-
fected population ratios are used. The mean values of representation bias are calculated by averaging all values throughout the stud-
ied weeks for each race/ethnicity in each state. With the same calculation manner, the mean values of affected population ratios are
derived. In addition, the statistical results for the linear fit between representation bias and population ratios are listed in Table 6. The
fitted linear line has the parameters of intercept and slope, and the significance level is provided with a t-test. As shown in this table,
for all the races/ethnicities, the social media representation bias is inversely correlated with the affected population ratio. And such a
claim is statistically significant at least with the level of 0.1. In other words, for the over-represented group, social media representa-
tion bias tends to decrease with the increase of the affected population ratio, while for the under-represented group, the under-
representation bias level tends to increase.
    The distance-based overview of social media representation bias at the state level is presented in Fig. 6. To better compare the rep-
resentation bias with that at the nation level, the mean value of representation bias at the nation level is also included, shown by the




                                       Fig. 3. Temporal trends of distance-based representation bias at nation-level.

                                                                             8
Y. Chen et al.                                                                                      International Journal of Disaster Risk Reduction 81 (2022) 103312




                                                Fig. 4. Temporal trends of representation bias at the state-level.




                 Fig. 5. Correlations between the affected population ratios and bias mean values: (a) Hispanic; (b) White; (c) Black; (d) Asian.


dashed line. The overview of social media representation bias varies across the states: there is a below-national-average representa-
tion bias in FL; the states of CA and NY are in the vicinity of the national average; TX shows the highest representation bias among the
four states. This is a clear indication that social media representation bias is more prominent in TX, which is beneficial for decision-
makers to utilize social media data for transit operation planning and policy development in that jurisdiction.




                                                                                9
Y. Chen et al.                                                                                           International Journal of Disaster Risk Reduction 81 (2022) 103312


Table 6
Statistical results for the correlation analysis.

 Race                            Variable                       Coefficient                          p-value

 Hispanic                        Slope                          −0.9841                              0.015(**)
                                 Intercept                      0.1119                               0.132 (Not significant)
 White                           Slope                          −1.3924                              0.084(*)
                                 Intercept                      0.7514                               0.032(**)
 Black                           Slope                          −0.9135                              0.051(*)
                                 Intercept                      0.0823                               0.287 (Not significant)
 Asian                           Slope                          −1.0880                              0.019(**)
                                 Intercept                      0.1471                               0.010(**)
Note. The symbols ***, **, and * represent the significance of 0.01, 0.05, and 0.1, respectively.




                                Fig. 6. Temporal trends of distance-based representation bias at state-level: (a) CA; (b) NY; (c) TX; (d) FL.


5. Conclusion
    This presented study has theoretical and methodological contributions to social media representation bias investigation. From the
theoretical side, this study has further underscored the necessity of building an appropriate benchmark for social media representa-
tion bias investigation. And the explored patterns contribute to understanding the interplay between affected population ratios and
social media representation bias. In addition, social media representation bias varies across the studied states, which highlights the
necessity of conducting region-specific representation bias investigation to derive reliable insights using social media. From the
methodological side, the presented study proposes a systematic representation bias investigation framework that could be easily gen-
erated for other applications as the only differences are the employed social media data. This presented study intelligently builds a re-
liable representation bias benchmark by utilizing the information in surveys and official reports. Social media representation bias is
indicated in a straightforward manner, and a distance-based metric is proposed to provide an overview of the representation bias. In
addition, a Bayesian-based approach is developed to model the sampling uncertainty of social media users and survey respondents,
which enables reliable modeling of population ratios. It is worth noting that the proposed framework could be applied to other case
studies (e.g., disasters with shorter time spans) as long as the demographic information of the benchmark population is available.
    Practically, the research findings are expected to assist practitioners in making unbiased public transit-related policy decisions us-
ing social media data. As shown in the proposed framework, the readiness of demographic information for disaster-affected popula-
tion plays a critical role. To enhance the applicability of the proposed framework, we suggest two ways to accelerate the collection of
the demographic information: (1) conducting required surveys in a rapid manner, such as online surveys; and (2) summarizing the de-
mographic characteristics in frequently-occurring hazards, such as hurricanes and storms, and the summarized demographic charac-
teristics are expected to be directly used in future for regions with similar hazard striking. Once the representation bias has been ob-
tained, practitioners are expected to make informed disaster relief decisions accordingly. For example, the White group is over-
represented, and the Black and Hispanic groups are under-represented in this case study. Therefore, to reliably obtain transit-related
public opinion, decision-makers in this case should scale down the opinion obtained from the White group while scaling up the opin-
ion from the Black and Hispanic groups.

                                                                                     10
Y. Chen et al.                                                                                        International Journal of Disaster Risk Reduction 81 (2022) 103312


    This presented research suffers several major limitations. First, the used public transit utilization rates are summarized at the na-
tion level, and they vary across the studied states [34], which affects the calculation accuracy of the affected population distribution
in the studied states. Second, due to the difficulty of obtaining detailed location information of tweets, this study is conducted at the
state level and above (i.e., nation level) to ensure enough tweets; thus, it is incapable of providing bias insights in a more detailed geo-
graphic granularity. Third, the obtained locations of Twitter users might not be completely relevant as the location information in
user profiles might not be their residential locations, which makes the bias investigation less reliable. Fourth, only the representation
bias caused by races/ethnicities is studied, and the bias caused by other demographic traits (e.g., household income, age, and gender),
which has been recognized in previous studies [9,11], is still unclear. Fifth, social media representation bias might vary along with
time scales, and time scale sensitivity analysis would be beneficial for making the results solid. However, due to the availability of the
household pulse survey data, such sensitivity analysis is missing in this study.
    In the future, we aim to conduct the following research efforts. First, the social media representation bias caused by other demo-
graphic traits (e.g., age and gender) will be studied by utilizing and developing intelligent demographic inferring approaches. Second,
social media representation bias in other decision support scenarios will be examined to verify the accuracy and consistency of the
framework. Third, the proposed distance-based measure that reflects representation bias may be converted to other metrics and/or
incorporated into disaster response and relief decision-making processes. Fourth, representation bias in different types of disasters
will be further investigated to understand the interplay between representation bias and disaster characteristics. By doing so, compre-
hensive representation bias investigation results are expected to be obtained to provide unbiased decision support for disaster man-
agement.

Declaration of competing interest
    The authors declare that they have no known competing financial interests or personal relationships that could have appeared to
influence the work reported in this paper.

Data availability
    Data will be made available on request.

References
 [1] L. Li, Z. Ma, T. Cao, Leveraging social media data to study the community resilience of New York City to 2019 power outage, Int. J. Disaster Risk Reduct. 51
     (2020) 101776 Elsevier Ltd July.
 [2] J.Y. Park, E. Mistur, D. Kim, Y. Mo, R. Hoefer, Toward human-centric urban infrastructure: text mining for social media data to identify the public perception of
     COVID-19 policy in transportation hubs, Sustain. Cities Soc. 76 (2022), 103524 Elsevier Ltd November 2021.
 [3] B. Zhong, Y. Huang, Q. Liu, Mental health toll from the coronavirus: social media usage reveals Wuhan residents’ depression and secondary trauma in the
     COVID-19 outbreak, Comput. Hum. Behav. 114 (2021), 106524 Elsevier Ltd August 2020.
 [4] X. Lin, K.A. Lachlan, P.R. Spence, Exploring extreme events on social media: a comparison of user reposting/retweeting behaviors on Twitter and Weibo,
     Comput. Hum. Behav. 65 (2016) 576–581 Elsevier Ltd.
 [5] Y. Chen, Q. Wang, W. Ji, Rapid assessment of disaster impacts on highways using social media, J. Manag. Eng. 36 (5) (2020) 04020068.
 [6] Y. Kryvasheyeu, H. Chen, N. Obradovich, E. Moro, P. Van Hentenryck, J. Fowler, M. Cebrian, Rapid assessment of disaster damage using social media activity,
     Sci. Adv. 2 (3) (2016) 1–12.
 [7] Y. Chen, W. Ji, Estimating public demand following disasters through Bayesian-based information integration, Int. J. Disaster Risk Reduc. 68 (2022) 102713.
 [8] N. Cesare, C. Grant, E.O. Nsoesie, Understanding demographic bias and representation in social media health data, in: WebSci 2019 - Companion of the 11th
     ACM Conference on Web Science, 7–9, 2019.
 [9] J.S. Dargin, C. Fan, A. Mostafavi, Vulnerable populations and social media use in disasters: uncovering the digital divide in three major US hurricanes, Int. J.
     Disaster Risk Reduc. 54 (2021), 102043 Elsevier Ltd August 2020.
[10] A.G. Gulnerman, H. Karaman, D. Pekaslan, S. Bilgi, Citizens’ spatial footprint on twitter-anomaly, trend and bias investigation in istanbul, ISPRS Int. J. Geo-Inf.
     9 (4) (2020).
[11] Y. Jiang, Z. Li, X. Ye, Understanding demographic and socioeconomic biases of geotagged Twitter users at the county level, Cartogr. Geogr. Inf. Sci. 46 (3)
     (2019) 228–242 Taylor & Francis.
[12] M.M. Malik, H. Lamba, C. Nakos, J. Pfeffer, Population bias in geotagged tweets, in: AAAI Workshop - Technical Report, 2015, pp. 18–27 WS-15-18.
[13] F. Luo, G. Cao, K. Mulligan, X. Li, Explore spatiotemporal and demographic characteristics of human mobility via Twitter: a case study of Chicago, Appl. Geogr.
     70 (2016) 11–25 Elsevier Ltd.
[14] A. Basiri, M. Haklay, G. Foody, P. Mooney, Crowdsourced geospatial data quality: challenges and future directions, Int. J. Geogr. Inf. Sci. 33 (8) (2019)
     1588–1593 Taylor & Francis.
[15] J.S. Dargin, A. Mostafavi, Human-centric infrastructure resilience: uncovering well-being risk disparity due to infrastructure disruptions in disasters, PLoS One
     15 (6) (2020).
[16] Y. Cui, Q. He, Inferring Twitters’ socio-demographics to correct sampling bias of social media data for augmenting travel behavior analysis, J. Big Data Analyt.
     Transportat. 3 (2) (2021) 159–174 Springer Singapore.
[17] A. Culotta, N.K. Ravi, J. Cutler, Predicting the demographics of Twitter users from website traffic data, in: The National Conference on Artificial Intelligence,
     vol. 1, 2015, pp. 72–78.
[18] L. Sloan, J. Morgan, P. Burnap, M. Williams, Who tweets? deriving the demographic characteristics of age, occupation and social class from twitter user meta-
     data, PLoS One 10 (3) (2015) 1–20.
[19] F. Yuan, M. Li, R. Liu, W. Zhai, B. Qi, Social media for enhanced understanding of disaster resilience during Hurricane Florence, Int. J. Inf. Manag. 57 (2021),
     102289 Elsevier Ltd April 2020.
[20] US Census Bureau, Frequently Occurring Surnames from Census 2010, US Census Bureau, 2010. https://www.census.gov/topics/population/genealogy/data/
     2010_surnames.html.
[21] D. Ruths, J. Pfeffer, Social media for large studies of behavior, Science 346 (6213) (2014) 1063–1064.
[22] M. Choli, D.J. Kuss, Perceptions of blame on social media during the coronavirus pandemic, Comput. Hum. Behav. 124 (2021), 106895 Elsevier Ltd September
     2020.
[23] M. Jamali, A. Nejat, S. Ghosh, F. Jin, G. Cao, Social media data and post-disaster recovery, Int. J. Inf. Manag. 44 (2019) 25–37 Elsevier December 2017.
[24] J. Kim, H. Park, A framework for understanding online group behaviors during a catastrophic event, Int. J. Inf. Manag. 51 (2020), 102051 Elsevier June 2019.
[25] Y. Chen, W. Ji, Public demand urgency for equitable infrastructure restoration planning, Int. J. Disaster Risk Reduc. 64 (2021) 102510.

                                                                                  11
Y. Chen et al.                                                                                     International Journal of Disaster Risk Reduction 81 (2022) 103312

[26] Y. Chen, W. Ji, Enhancing situational assessment of critical infrastructure following disasters using social media, J. Manag. Eng. 37 (6) (2021) 04021058.
[27] L. Li, M. Bensi, Q. Cui, G.B. Baecher, Y. Huang, Social media crowdsourcing for rapid damage assessment following a sudden-onset natural hazard event, Int. J.
     Inf. Manag. 60 (2021), 102378 Elsevier Ltd June.
[28] Y. Wang, J.E. Taylor, M.J. Garvin, Measuring resilience of human–spatial systems to disasters: framework combining spatial-network analysis and Fisher
     information, J. Manag. Eng. 36 (4) (2020) 04020019.
[29] Y. Wang, J.E. Taylor, Coupling sentiment and human mobility in natural disasters: a Twitter-based study of the 2014 South Napa Earthquake, Nat. Hazards 92
     (2) (2018) 907–925 Springer Netherlands.
[30] Z. Ghahramani, Probabilistic machine learning and artificial intelligence, Nature 521 (2015) 452–521.
[31] W.M. Bolstad, J.M. Curran, Introduction to Bayesian Statistics, John Wiley & Sons, 2016.
[32] W. Ji, S.M. AbouRizk, Credible interval estimation for fraction nonconforming: analytical and numerical solutions, Autom. ConStruct. 83 (2017) 56–67
     Elsevier July.
[33] American Public Transportation Association, Public Transportation Ridership Report, American Public Transportation Association (APTA), 2021 Second
     Quarter 2021.
[34] H.M. Clark, Who Rides Public Transportation: the Backbone of a Multimodal Lifestyle, American Public Transportation Association, 2017, pp. 1–86.




                                                                                12
