American Economic Review 2018, 108(9): 2442–2476
https://doi.org/10.1257/aer.20170947




                                          Media Bias in China†

                           By Bei Qin, David Strömberg, and Yanhui Wu*

               This paper examines whether and how market competition affected
               the political bias of g­ overnment-owned newspapers in China from
               1981 to 2011. We measure media bias based on coverage of gov-
               ernment mouthpiece content ( propaganda) relative to commer-
               cial content. We first find that a reform that forced newspaper exits
               (reduced competition) affected media bias by increasing product
               specialization, with some papers focusing on propaganda and others
               on commercial content. Second, ­lower-level governments produce
               less-biased content and launch commercial newspapers earlier,
               ­
               eroding ­higher-level governments’ political goals. Third, ­bottom-up
               competition intensifies the ­politico-economic trade-off, leading to
               product proliferation and less audience exposure to propaganda.
               (JEL D72, L31, L82, O14, O17, P26, P31)



         While freedom of the media is often regarded as a cornerstone of democracy,
     media control is an indispensable part of an autocratic system. Economists have
     shown that the political bias of media has important consequences in autocracies, such
     as the negative social effects of propaganda (Adena et al. 2015; ­Yanagizawa-Drott
     2014) and the significant impact of media freedom on corruption (Brunetti and
     Weder 2003) and regime support (Enikolopov, Petrova, and Zhuravskaya 2011).
     To further understand media control and the effects of such control in autocracies,
     a central question arises: to what extent and why do the media deviate from the
     ­political bias imposed by the ruler? Despite its importance, this question has not
      yet been rigorously examined on the basis of l­arge-scale data. The current paper
      addresses this question in the context of China, the largest autocracy and newspaper
      market in the world.
         One striking feature of the Chinese media is the ­so-called “prosperity without
      freedom” (He 2007). In China, all ­general-interest newspapers are owned and

         * Qin: Faculty of Business and Economics, University of Hong Kong, Pokfulam, Hong Kong (email: beiqin@
     hku.hk); Strömberg: Economics Department, Stockholm University, SE-106 91, Stockholm, Sweden (email: david.
     stromberg@iies.su.se); Wu: Marshall School of Business, University of Southern California, Los Angeles, CA
     90089 (email: yanhuiwu@marshall.usc.edu). This paper was accepted to the AER under the guidance of Stefano
     DellaVigna, Coeditor. We thank three referees, Ruben Durante, Matthew Gentzkow, Chang-Tai Hsieh, Brian
     Knight, Ruixue Jia, Yang Lu, Jen Pan, Maria Petrova, Nancy Qian, Jesse Shapiro, and participants of conferences
     and seminars at Chicago, CUHK, Harvard, HKU, LSE, PSE, Stanford (GSB), UCL, UCSD, USC, Warwick, China
     Economics Summer Institute, NBER China, NEUDC, and IEA World Congress for helpful comments and sug-
     gestions. The authors declare that they have no relevant or material financial interests that relate to the research
     described in this paper.
         †
           Go to https://doi.org/10.1257/aer.20170947 to visit the article page for additional materials and author
     disclosure statement(s).

                                                            2442
VOL. 108 NO. 9                        QIN ET AL.: MEDIA BIAS IN CHINA                     2443



s­ upervised by the highest political ­decision-making bodies: the Chinese Communist
 Party Committees (CCPCs). These newspapers are assigned the political task of
 implementing the P        ­ arty-Line journalism, most notably, propaganda. Despite strict
 political control, Chinese newspapers operate in a vibrant advertising market that,
 in size, is behind only the United States. The pursuit of profits has not only given
 birth to a large number of commercial newspapers, but has also turned g­ overnment
 mouthpieces into ­         state-owned enterprises (SOEs). This phenomenon raises a
 ­fundamental question: is there a p­ olitico-economic trade-off in the Chinese media?
  In other words, can economic prosperity of the media be achieved without impairing
  the ruler’s political goals?
         Given the vibrant market, a second natural question emerges: does m            ­ arket
  competition have any effect on a newspaper’s political bias in such a highly
  ­
  ­controlled environment, and if so, what is the nature of this effect? Because Chinese
   governments, from the national to the county level, directly own all g­ eneral-interest
   newspapers, one may wonder in what sense competition exists. With the e­ xception
   of several national newspapers, most Chinese newspapers are owned by local
   governments which have a high degree of autonomy in economic decisions,
   ­
   ­including how to run their newspapers (Zhao 1998; Xu 2011). Thus, competition
    occurs between newspaper owners who have individual profit motives and, likely,
    different valuations of media bias.
         This paper examines the two questions above in three steps: (i) measuring the
    political bias of newspapers, (ii) estimating the causal effects of competition on this
    bias, and (iii) providing evidence on how market structure interplays with politics
    to affect media bias. Based on these answers, we finally address the question of
    what economic and social factors affect content allocation in the media and readers’
    exposure to media bias.
         We focus our study on g­ eneral-interest newspapers, including both government
    mouthpieces (Party papers) and unofficial commercialized newspapers (commercial
    papers). These newspapers account for the lion’s share of readership. Our study is
    based on two datasets. First, we use the content of 117 ­general-interest newspa-
    pers published in urban areas of mainland China from 1999 to 2010. This database
    is provided by WiseNews, which contains the largest amount of digital content of
    Chinese newspapers during the sample period. Second, we compile a comprehen-
    sive directory of approximately 1,000 g­ eneral-interest Chinese newspapers from
    1981 to 2011.
         Our media bias measure is intended to capture the major characteristics of news
    content that reflect a newspaper’s adherence to the Chinese Communist Party
    (CCP) journalism on the one hand and the degree to which it caters to a general
    ­audience on the other. To this end, we classify a newspaper’s coverage of nine topics
     ­capturing (i) mouthpiece coverage (mentions of political leaders or citations of the
      CCP’s ­authoritative news agency), (ii) politically sensitive or negative information
(­reporting on corruption, disasters, and accidents and controversial issues that are
intensively covered by oppositional overseas Chinese media), and (iii) ­commercially
      oriented content (crime, sports, and entertainment).
         To generate a s­ ingle-dimensional measure of media bias, we use principal com-
      ponent analysis (PCA) to consolidate the nine types of content above. At the provin-
      cial level, the resulting bias index is strongly positively correlated with the intensity
2444                                  THE AMERICAN ECONOMIC REVIEW                                 SEPTEMBER 2018



of internet censorship reported in Bamman, O’Connor, and Smith (2012) and also
with the share of government accounts on Chinese social media estimated by Qin,
Strömberg, and Wu (2017). At the individual newspaper level, a clear pattern of
product differentiation emerges: some newspapers focus on propaganda content,
while others focus on commercial content. The bias index exhibits a strong positive
correlation with the newspaper being a Party paper (as opposed to a commercial
paper) and a strong negative correlation with advertising revenue. Within the same
newspaper market and year, a ­one-standard-deviation increase in the bias index is
associated with a 33 percent fall in advertising revenues.
    The results above suggest that advertisers (readers) are elastic to politically
biased content.1 In a democracy with press freedom and private media, such an
elastic demand will naturally induce competing media to cater to the audience’s
preferences, thus taming the influence of political forces. In China, however, the
government’s political strategy may cripple the functioning of the market. As
observed in China, one political strategy is to alleviate the tension between political
and economic goals through product differentiation. Specifically, a CCPC can pro-
duce one highly biased Party paper that exclusively focuses on political goals and
one ­less-biased commercial paper that largely focuses on economic goals.
    We build a simple model to rationalize this strategy and, further, to show that
it is less effective in the presence of competition. Consider a market in which the
same CCPC owns two newspapers: a Party paper with high bias and a commercial
paper with low bias. Reducing the bias of the Party paper increases its audience
at the expense of its sibling commercial paper but has no effect on the CCPC’s
aggregate profits. Meanwhile, reducing the bias of the commercial paper does not
incur a large political cost because the readers of the Party paper are not affected
by the bias reduction. In this way, the existence of a commercial paper entirely
relieves the Party paper of economic concerns, and the existence of the Party paper
reduces the commercial paper’s political concerns. Such a strategy is analogous
to the m­ arket-segmentation strategy used by ­profit-maximizing firms to extract the
surplus from consumers who differ in their willingness to pay for different brands
or quality.
    Suppose that another CCPC introduces a competing paper whose bias is located
between that of the existing Party and commercial papers. Now, reducing the Party
paper’s bias will steal audience from the competing paper and thus increase the
owner’s aggregate profits. Hence, the Party paper will consider both political and
economic goals; its owner’s incentive to differentiate products decreases. This effect
occurs when some readers flow across newspapers of different types.
    To test the theoretical argument above, we explore a drastic reform in which
the Chinese central government closed more than 80 percent of the ­county-level
Party Dailies in 2003 for reasons that were exogenous to the newspapers’ deci-
sions. The exit of these papers reduced the number of competing newspapers in
the prefectural markets where prefectural and county CCPCs ran different newspa-
pers. Given the strong evidence that ­lower-level newspapers are less biased, these

    1
      The readership of a newspaper is arguably the most important determinant of its advertising revenue. But we
are not able to estimate the elasticity of advertising revenues with respect to readership because reliable circulation
data for Chinese newspapers are not available.
VOL. 108 NO. 9                                 QIN ET AL.: MEDIA BIAS IN CHINA                                 2445



 county Party Dailies were likely to be less (or more) biased than the prefectural
 Party (or commercial) papers. Using a ­difference-in-differences approach, we find
 that closing these l­ ower-level Party papers significantly increased the differentiation
 in the political bias of the ­higher-level Party and commercial papers, as predicted
 by the theory. The estimation is robust to scrutiny for the existence of a ­pre-trend
 and a number of potential confounding factors. In addition, the estimated effects are
 considerable. For example, the reform caused articles citing the CCP mouthpiece
 news agency to fall by 6.2 percent in commercial papers and articles mentioning top
 leaders to increase by 8.3 percent in Party papers. This result shows that competition
 significantly affects the political bias of the media in China. Particularly, the news-
 papers owned by l­ ower-level CCPCs impair h­ igher-level CCPCs’ strategy of control
through product differentiation.
    More generally, we find evidence that ­lower-level CCPCs erode the political goals
of ­higher-level CCPCs. Within the same market, year, and newspaper type, news-
papers owned by ­lower-level CCPCs are less biased. In 22 of 26 ­provincial-capital
markets where provincial and prefectural CCPCs compete, the ­lower-level CCPC
started the first commercial paper. The entry of a commercial paper produces a polit-
ical cost by reducing the audience of the ­preexisting Party paper and thus the reach
of its propaganda.2 We argue that it is likely that the ­lower-level CCPC cares less
about the political cost of reduced bias exposure because this cost, such as political
unrest, has geographic spillovers that are not fully internalized by the ­lower-level
CCPC. Consistent with this argument, we find that in a sample of 265 prefectures,
lower valuation of political control for historical reasons such as exposure to Western
powers or influence of the CCP ideology facilitates the entry of commercial papers
and hinders the entry of Party papers.
    Our findings on the effect of competition on newspaper bias and the entry
­patterns of different types of newspapers demonstrate that newspaper markets in
 China are ­neither segregated across levels of government nor segmented across
 Party-commercial newspaper types. Thus, hierarchical competition between
 ­
 CCPCs acts as a driving force to reduce Chinese readers’ exposure to political bias.
 Economic prosperity cannot be achieved without conflicting with political goals.
    This paper advances economic research on the media. In a democracy with press
 freedom, why ­profit-maximizing media are politically biased is an intriguing ques-
 tion that has attracted substantial research interest.3 In an autocracy with strict media
control, the question of interest is reversed: what drives ­state-owned media to deviate
from the political bias imposed by the rulers? One influential answer to this question
is that autocratic governments regulate the media to trade off political control (cen-
sorship) against the use of ­bottom-up information for monitoring or surveillance
(e.g., Egorov, Guriev, and Sonin 2009; Lorentzen 2014; King, Pan, and Roberts
2013; Qin, Strömberg, and Wu 2017). The present paper stresses another trade-
off: the ­politico-economic trade-off, which is fundamental in theoretical studies of
media capture and control (e.g., Besley and Prat 2006; Gehlbach and Sonin 2014).

    2
      Our content classification shows that Party and commercial papers differ primarily in the mouthpiece versus
commercial content. They do not differ significantly in the coverage of corruption, accidents, and disasters, as will
be discussed later.
    3
      See Prat and Strömberg (2013); Gentzkow, Shapiro, and Stone (2016); and Puglisi and Snyder (2016) for
recent surveys and the references therein.
2446                        THE AMERICAN ECONOMIC REVIEW                SEPTEMBER 2018



Our research provides some of the first rigorous evidence on this trade-off. We mea-
sure, identify, and analyze the p­ olitico-economic trade-off in Chinese newspapers,
illustrating that economic development and the resulting market competition play
an important role in shaping media bias, even in a strictly controlled environment.
     Our research also contributes to the study of market structure and media bias
(e.g., Baldasty 1992; Gentzkow, Glaeser, and Goldin 2006; Gentzkow and Shapiro
2006, 2010; Gentzkow, Shapiro, and Sinkinson 2014; Galvis, Snyder, and Song
2016). Economically, we show that media ownership can change the effects of
­
market competition on media bias through product differentiation. This result
relates to Gabszewicz, Laussel, and Sonnac (2001) and Mullainathan and Shleifer
(2005). Politically, we highlight that competition between local governments in a
­decentralized or federalist system can limit the supply of media bias.
     Finally, this paper fits into studies of ­government-controlled firms, which are
 common in developing countries. Because of their political goals (such as protecting
 national security, maintaining fiscal revenues, or sustaining high employment), these
 firms are economically inefficient (e.g., Shleifer and Vishny 1994; Boycko, Shleifer,
 and Vishny 1996). In China, resolving the ­politico-economic conflict is regarded as
 crucial for SOE performance and economic reform (e.g., Cao, Qian, and Weingast
 1999; Lin and Tan 1999; Bai, Lu, and Tao 2006; Hsieh and Song 2015). The media
 bias index that we construct provides a direct measure of the p­ olitico-economic
 trade-off and can be used as an outcome when studying the political control of the
 economy. For instance, we show that our media bias measure, aggregated at the
 provincial level, is strongly correlated with a p­ ro-market competency index across
 regions in China (Fan and Wang 2009).
     The rest of the paper proceeds as follows. The next section describes the
 ­institutional background. Section II explains how we measure the political bias of
  Chinese newspapers. Section III develops the theoretical framework. Sections IV
  and V present the empirical analysis of media bias, with the former focusing on
  the effect of competition and the latter on market dynamics. Section VI concludes.
  A formal model, a detailed description of the data, and additional Tables and Figures
  (indexed with the prefix “A” throughout) can be found in the online Appendix.

                             I. Institutional Background

      This section describes the main features of the Chinese newspaper industry,
 d­ rawing heavily on a directory of all Chinese newspapers during the 1­ 981–2011
 period. We do not include newspapers before 1981 because most newspapers
 were closed during the Chinese Cultural Revolution (­1966–1976). We construct
 the d­irectory from four sources: (i) the Chinese Newspaper Directory (2003,
2006, 2010), published by the State Administration for Press and Publication,
the ­authority that issues ­newspaper licenses; (ii) the Annual China Journalism
Yearbooks (­1982–2011), published by the Chinese Academy of Social Science;
(iii) the China Newspaper Industry Yearbooks (­2004–2011), published by a
­Beijing-based research institute; and (iv) an e­ ight-volume collection of the front
pages of major n­ ewspapers on the date of first publication. For each newspaper, we
track information about the location of its headquarters, publication periods, direct
ownership, ­financing sources, government supervisor, administrative ranking within
VOL. 108 NO. 9                     QIN ET AL.: MEDIA BIAS IN CHINA                  2447



the Chinese ­government ­hierarchy, and type of readership (general or specialized).
To the best of our knowledge, our newspaper directory is the most comprehensive
among existing data sources.

                             A. Ownership and Control

     All Chinese newspapers are required to be completely or primarily owned by
the state. They must be affiliated with a government supervisor who is responsible
for licensing, appointing top personnel, and monitoring important editorial matters.
Most importantly, only a CCPC is eligible to obtain a license for a ­general-interest
newspaper.
     The ownership structure of Chinese newspapers parallels the ­four-level h­ ierarchy
of the CCPC system: nation, province, prefecture, and county. The control of
­non-national newspapers is decentralized to local CCPCs. As a direct owner, a local
 CCPC monitors the newspapers under its administration and has the right to claim
 and distribute their residuals. With a few exceptions, the business operation of a
 ­lower-level newspaper is independent of its ­higher-level counterparts.
     Per regulation, g­ eneral-interest newspapers come in variants that are i­ndicated
  by their names (i) Daily, (ii) Evening, and (iii) Metro and similar names. A Daily
is a CCPC’s official mouthpiece. Its editorial policy is strictly ­controlled by the
corresponding CCPC Propaganda Department. By contrast, “Evenings” and
“Metros” are less controlled in terms of both editorial policies and ­managerial
autonomy. They differ in publication time: Evenings in the a­ fternoon and Metros in
the morning. In the 1990s, ­general-interest newspapers were ­permitted to produce
  subsidiary newspapers that were typically named Metros or Evenings. These sub-
  sidiary newspapers carried more ­consumer-oriented c­ ontent and actively absorbed
  ­non-state capital. In sum, we classify newspapers into three different categories
   based on ownership and name: (i) Party Dailies (CCPC mouthpieces), (ii) Party
  Evenings (both Evenings and Metros that are directly owned by CCPCs), and (iii)
Subsidiaries (Evenings and Metros owned by parent newspapers).

                          B. Political and Economic Goals

     All g­ eneral-interest newspapers have explicit political goals. The foremost
­political goal is to implement the CCP’s Party Line, a media policy that aims
 to mobilize political actions and sustain regime stability. To this end, newspa-
 pers must carry out the tasks of propagating the CCP’s ideology and leadership,
 informing c­ adres and the public of Party decisions and government policies, and
 ­suppressing news that may negatively affect regime stability (Zhao 1998). To
  implement these tasks, the CCP propaganda departments regularly issue directives
  and convene meetings to direct editorial policies. Failure to adhere to the Party
  Line leads not only to the withdrawal of circulating newspapers and suspension
  of licenses but also to the d­ ismissal of editors and the demotion of related govern-
  ment officials (He 2007).
     A ­less-known political role of the Chinese media is the ­so-called Mass Line,
through which the media provide intelligence to top leaders about public sentiment
and the performance of bureaucrats (Zhao 1998). Under the slogan “­supervision
2448                        THE AMERICAN ECONOMIC REVIEW                  SEPTEMBER 2018



  by public opinion,” the Mass Line permits media to report on corruption and
  ­wrongdoing by ­lower-level Party officials and government agencies.
       Chinese newspapers, including Party Dailies, also have the economic goal of
   ­earning profits. As early as 1979, the state granted permission to the People’s
    Daily (the foremost CCP mouthpiece) and several provincial newspapers to earn
    adv­ertising revenues and seek profits. This ­profit-seeking goal was authorized by
 regulators in 1988. Since then, ­general-interest newspapers have been regarded
 as ­quasi-SOEs and have operated under the slogan “supervised by politicians and
 ­managed by entrepreneurs.” It was estimated that at the end of the 1990s, a­ dvertising
  revenues accounted for at least 70 percent of the overall income of the mainstream
  newspapers (Man 2001).
       One reason for Chinese newspapers to maintain dual ­politico-economic goals is
to have newspapers implement the Party Line using money they make themselves
(Chen and Lee 1998). Newspaper profits are also important financial sources for
local governments. First, newspapers’ profits can contribute to local governments’
fiscal budgets through the elimination of subsidies, taxation, and residuals. During
the 1990s and 2000s, a large number of newspapers, including some Party Dailies,
were among the top ­taxpayers in their localities. Second, lucrative newspapers
­provide opportunities for local politicians to seek rents. Finally, given the perfor-
 mance metrics for promotion used by the central government, local politicians may
 care more about hard measures such as GDP growth and fiscal revenues and less
 about soft measures such as promoting the CCP ideology and sustaining regime
 stability.

                                 C. Market Structure

    Historical Evolution (­1981–2011).—Figure 1 depicts the evolution of
g­ eneral-interest newspapers. In 1981, there were 242 papers, 230 of which were
 Party Dailies. The number of Party Dailies increased continuously during the
 1980s and 1990s. Spurred by the policy of s­ elf-financing and the rapid e­ xpansion
of ­advertising, Party Evenings flocked into the market in the 1980s, and then
Subsidiaries followed suit. The development of newspapers was clearly affected
by the economic reforms involving SOEs. As indicated by the first vertical line in
Figure 1, the number of Subsidiaries increased substantially after 1992, a landmark
year of Chinese SOE reform.

     Product Differentiation.—Starting in the early 1950s, the Chinese g­ overnment
 aimed to achieve its political goals by monopolizing the market with Party Dailies.
 Although Party Dailies were subscribed to mainly by government units, mass
 ­organizations and SOEs, and civil servants and CCP members, their ­readership ­varied
substantially across regions and over time. In the 1980s, Party Dailies d­ ominated
the newspaper industry and were widely read. Many provincial and p­ refectural
Party Dailies doubled or even tripled their volume to meet readers’ demand for
diverse information; one indicator was that they established ­        non-government
­circulation n­ etworks including street vendors to reach a wider readership (Wu
 2004). According to a survey of major newspapers in nine economically developed
 provinces, the ­leading Party Dailies consistently sold over 500,000 copies per day
VOL. 108 NO. 9                                    QIN ET AL.: MEDIA BIAS IN CHINA                           2449



                         All levels                        Panel A. Central           Panel B. Province
1,000                                                        8                         150
                                                             6
 800                                                                                   100
                                                             4
                                                                                        50
 600                                                         2
                                                             0                           0
 400
                                                          Panel C. Prefecture         Panel D. County
 200
                                                           600
                                                                                      300
    0                                                      400                        200
     1980           1990          2000            2010
                                                           200                         100
                 Total                Party dailies
                                                             0                           0
                 Party evenings       Subsidiaries
                                                              1980 1990 2000 2010        1980 1990 2000 2010


                     Figure 1. ­General-Interest Newspapers during the ­1981–2011 Period

Notes: The first vertical line indicates 1992, which is a landmark year of Chinese economic reform; the second
vertical line indicates 2003, when the central government withdrew the licenses of most ­county-level newspapers.
Source: Chinese newspaper directory data constructed by the authors.




and earned revenues comparable to the most profitable SOEs (Yang and Sun 2001).
Concerned about Party Dailies’ strong incentives to pursue economic benefits, some
CCPCs launched Evenings to differentiate their products: a Party Daily for political
goals and a Party Evening for economic goals.

   Market Competition.—During the 1980s and early 1990s, the massive entry of
Evenings substantially eroded the market share and readership of Party Dailies.
Within the same market, the advertising revenue ratio between Party Dailies and
Party Evenings was between 1:2.5 and 1:3.1 in the early 1990s (Chen and Guo
1999). In terms of circulation among g­ eneral-interest newspapers, the share of
Party Dailies fell from 70 percent in 1986 to 37 percent in 1996, while the share of
commercial papers increased correspondingly (Chen and Lee 1998). The decline
of Party Dailies was most notable in the provincial market, where multiple CCPCs
competed. It was reported that the average circulation of provincial Party Dailies
dropped continuously from 386,400 in 1984 to 239,100 in 1999 (Yang and Sun
2001). In response to the shrinkage of Party Dailies, provincial CCPCs allowed
Party Dailies to introduce Subsidiaries that were completely commercialized. This
change drove the boom in commercial newspapers after the ­mid-1990s.

    Provincial Capital Cities.—The Chinese newspaper industry consists of a large
 number of independent local markets at the province and prefecture levels. The most
                                                                     ­ etropolises with
 active markets are the provincial capital cities, most of which are m
a population of more than 5 million. In these markets, two owners—the p­ rovincial
CCPC and the CCPC of the corresponding capital city—run different sets of
­newspapers to compete for readership and advertising revenues. For example, in
 Chengdu, the ­capital city of Sichuan Province, the Chengdu CCPC owns a Party
2450                       THE AMERICAN ECONOMIC REVIEW               SEPTEMBER 2018



Daily, an Evening, and a Subsidiary, and the Sichuan provincial CCPC owns a Party
Daily and a Subsidiary. The two Party Dailies compete for ­low-ranked ­government
units and civil ­servants. Meanwhile, the Party Dailies and commercial papers
­compete for i­ndividual ­subscribers such as CCP members and SOE employees.
Fierce ­competition occurs among the commercial papers which are close substitutes
for general readers.

   ­Non-Capital Prefectures.—Another important type of market is the approximately
300 ­non-capital prefectures, most of which have a population of over one million. In
this market, the local CCPC operates a Party Daily and a commercial paper (either
Evening or Subsidiary). Before 2003, in many prefectures, c­ ounty-level CCPCs also
ran Party Dailies. In 2003, the central government withdrew the licenses of more
than 80 percent of these ­county-level newspapers, which caused a drastic drop in the
number of Party Dailies (see the second vertical line in Figure 1). We will explore
this 2003 reform to estimate the effect of competition on media bias.

                              II. Measurement of Bias

      Measuring media bias for a wide range of newspapers over a long period is
   genuinely difficult. Topics of interest can vary across newspapers with different
   target audiences. Use of language may change over time. Existing methods use
   the typical ideologies of think tanks that a media outlet quotes (Groseclose and
   Milyo 2005), “partisan” words (Gentzkow and Shapiro 2010), or the sentiments
of words (Tetlock 2007). However, these measures do not apply to the Chinese
media because words that express opposition to or negative sentiment toward the
official ideology are strongly suppressed. One potential alternative is to measure
the intensity and style of a newspaper’s coverage of certain events. However, this
approach could cause serious measurement problems when the selection of events
is asymmetric across newspaper types or unstable over time. Moreover, a scien-
tific method should be transparent to implement and easy to replicate. Weighing
the pros and cons of various approaches, we construct an ­issue-based measure of
media bias by exploiting topics that are common to newspapers and stable over
time.
      In practice, we first define issues and then search for related keywords in the
­digital archives of WiseNews, a Hong K      ­ ong-based data provider of newspaper
 ­content. We restrict our sample to the ­1999–2010 period because before that, only
  partial content from a few newspapers was available. Table 1 reports the basic
  ­information about this sample. During the sample period, the WiseNews database
   contains 117 ­general-interest newspapers published in mainland China, but the
   number of ­newspapers varies slightly over the years (see panel A). As summarized
in panel B, the sample contains 40 Party Dailies, 12 Evenings, and 65 Subsidiaries;
in terms of a­ dministrative rank, 5 are national, 71 provincial, and 41 prefectural.
Geographically, these ­newspapers cover major prefectural areas in 26 of the 31
provinces in mainland China. In short, our sample largely represents the newspaper
markets in urban areas, which comprise the majority of the readership in China.
Details about the keywords and discussion of the sample selection are provided in
online Appendix Sections A1 and A2.
VOL. 108 NO. 9                                    QIN ET AL.: MEDIA BIAS IN CHINA                                     2451



                             Table 1—Descriptive Statistics of the WiseNews Data

Panel A. Number of general-interest newspapers in WiseNews, by year
Year         1999     2000     2001       2002     2003     2004       2005    2006       2007     2008      2009     2010
Freq.         8        76       82         79         84     88         78      76         81          115    88       57
Source: WiseNews

Panel B. Number of general-interest newspapers in WiseNews, by type and administrative rank
Administrative rank                   Party dailies           Party evenings               Subsidiaries               Total
Central                                     2                           1                          2                     5
Province                                   22                           4                         45                    71
Prefecture                                 16                           7                         18                    41
Total                                      40                          12                         65                   117

Source: WiseNews and Chinese Newspaper Directory constructed by the authors

Panel C. Summary statistics
Overall
Variables                     Observations        Mean            SD             Min              Max
Leader mentions                   912             10.98       11.66              0.00            83.48
Xinhua cites                      912             23.02       15.16              0.00            86.07
Epoch stories                     905             23.29       14.17              0.00            57.36
Corruption                        912              0.16        0.10              0.00             0.75
Disasters                         912              0.50        0.69              0.00             9.12
Accidents                         912              0.12        0.11              0.00             0.88
Sport                             912              6.45        2.90              0.00            30.63
Crime                             912              0.53        0.36              0.00             2.41
Entertainment                     912             12.48        4.88              2.48            34.16
Total number of articles          912            18,641      13,838              289            104,240

Mean                                             By rank                                          By type
                                 Central         Province   Prefecture          Dailies         Evenings      Subsidiaries
Leader mentions                   24.27           11.16        8.73             21.09             7.05              5.08
Xinhua cites                      25.72           22.11       24.46             32.36            21.58             17.00
Epoch stories                     19.29           22.99       24.48             20.30            22.27             25.59
Corruption                         0.22            0.15        0.16              0.20             0.16              0.13
Disasters                          0.76            0.48        0.48              0.61             0.40              0.44
Accidents                          0.10            0.11        0.12              0.12             0.13              0.11
Sport                              5.34            6.39        6.72              5.62             7.09              6.85
Crime                              0.09            0.52        0.62              0.33             0.67              0.63
Entertainment                     13.34           12.43       12.47             10.35            12.65             13.90

Note: All variables are at the newspaper-by-year level.



                                           A. Content Classification

  We classify nine content categories for three functions: Party Line, Mass Line,
and Bottom Line.

    The Party Line: Propaganda.—We code three types of content to capture a
n­ ewspaper’s adherence to the Party Line. First, we calculate the number of a­ rticles
that mention the names of 2,111 political leaders during our sample period.4 Second,
we calculate the number of articles that are provided by or cite Xinhua News

    4
      Among these leaders, 108 individuals are at the central level, 816 at the provincial level, and 1,187 at the
prefectural level.
2452                                 THE AMERICAN ECONOMIC REVIEW                               SEPTEMBER 2018



 Agency, which is a key instrument for the CCP to enforce its propaganda objectives.
 Third, we identify articles covering the top 10 annual news events listed by
 two extreme media outlets: Xinhua News and the Epoch Times. The latter is an
 ­overseas-based Chinese newspaper sponsored by a­ nti-CCP organizations. We use
  the relative ­coverage of these two types of content to capture the omission of n­ egative
  news relative to the inclusion of positive news.5
     Note that the three categories above have implications for political accountability.
Propaganda engineered by the CCP has been shown to negatively affect political
accountability, to the extent one believes that propaganda can misinform people
or cause the misinterpretation of information (Bai et al. 2015; Cantoni et al. 2017;
Ou and Xiong 2017). Moreover, a newspaper’s coverage of the Epoch Times top
stories often contains negative information relevant to accountability. These content
­measures also closely relate to existing measures of media bias.6

   The Mass Line: Monitoring.—As discussed in Section IB, Chinese newspapers
are required to report the public’s concerns about local policymakers and outcomes
to improve their accountability to h­ igher-level politicians. We identify three types
of reports in this respect: reports on corruption, disasters, and accidents. Significant
disasters and accidents, particularly those caused by human error or wrongdoing,
are often regarded as reflecting the incompetence of government officials. We
extract data on the occurrence of disasters and accidents in China that involve more
than 30 fatalities from the ­EM-DAT database of the Center for Research on the
Epidemiology of Disasters in Brussels. During the sample period, we identify 226
such events. We then search for articles that cover these disasters and accidents
within a certain time frame around their occurrence.

     The Bottom Line: Entertainment.—We measure three typical types of soft
j­ ournalism that are demanded by general readers: sports, entertainment (e.g., ­movies
and music), and crime stories. They are the ­most-searched-for topics on Baidu, the
leading search engine in China.

                                          B. Summary Statistics

   Based on the content categories above, we define nine variables: Leader
Mentions, Xinhua Cites, Epoch Stories, Corruption, Disasters, Accidents, Sports,
Entertainment, and Crime. These variables are measured based on the proportion
of articles belonging to a content category to the total number of articles, except for
Epoch Stories, which is measured by the ratio of the number of articles that cover
the top events listed by the Epoch Times to the number of articles that cover the top
events listed by either Xinhua News or the Epoch Times.


    5
      Because the Epoch Times started to list its top ten news events in 2002, we use the 2002 data to fill in the
missing observations for this measure from 1999 to 2001.
    6
      For instance, news stories that cover politicians from a specific party are commonly used to measure media
bias favoring that party (e.g., D’Alessio and Allen 2000; Durante and Knight 2012). The articles that cite Xinhua
News are in the spirit of Groseclose and Milyo (2005), who use articles that cite think tanks to measure media bias.
Coverage of positive news is another common measure of bias that favors incumbent politicians (Larcinese, Puglisi,
and Snyder 2011).
VOL. 108 NO. 9                                 QIN ET AL.: MEDIA BIAS IN CHINA                                 2453



   The first half of panel C in Table 1 presents the summary statistics of these nine
variables at the n­ ewspaper-by-year level. Concerning the Party Line, 1.86 million arti-
cles (10.98 percent of all articles) mention a political leader, and 3.9 million articles
(23.2 percent) mention Xinhua News. We find 0.5 million articles covering the Epoch
Times’ top stories and 1.2 million articles covering Xinhua top stories.7 Regarding
the Mass Line, 26,909 articles cover corruption cases that are not part of government
officials’ speeches or a­ nti-corruption activities.8 We find 84,156 stories about disasters
and 19,796 stories about accidents. Bottom Line stories include 1.1 million articles on
sports, 2.12 million articles on entertainment, and 89,711 articles on crime.
   The second half of Panel C breaks down the summary statistics by ­newspapers’
administrative rank and type. Notably, central newspapers mention political ­leaders
twice (or three times) as often as provincial (or prefectural) newspapers. This result is
consistent with the expectation that central newspapers are more ­politically ­controlled.
Interestingly, central newspapers report more on corruption and d­ isasters than local
papers, suggesting that they implement ­Mass-Line journalism more intensively.
   Across newspaper types, compared to Party Dailies, Evenings and Subsidiaries
mention political leaders and cite Xinhua News far less and cover significantly more
crime and Epoch Times top stories. Somewhat surprisingly, Party Dailies report more
on corruption and disasters, which indicates their goals to implement the Mass Line.
Notably, Party Dailies produce a significant amount of soft journalism, for instance,
more than 10 percent of entertainment stories. This result suggests that some Party
Dailies care about general readership and is competitive with ­commercial papers.

                                     C. PCA as a Measure of Bias

    We aim to compress the nine content categories described above into one scalar to
capture how strongly a newspaper’s content reflects its political goals, as opposed to
its economic goals. This aim can be accomplished in several ways. First, one can use
the similarity between a newspaper’s content and a known focus on a particular goal,
as in Groseclose and Milyo (2005) and Gentzkow and Shapiro (2010). Given that
Party Dailies are the primary carriers of political goals, a newspaper with a ­content
mix that is characteristic of Party Dailies is likely to target its content toward political
goals. Thus, a measure of the weight placed on political goals could be the probability
that a newspaper is a Party Daily as predicted by its coverage of the nine categories.
Second, similarly, a measure of the weight placed on economic goals by a newspaper
could be its expected advertising revenues as predicted by its mix of coverage. Third,
if the p­ olitico-economic trade-off is indeed a primary dimension of product differ-
entiation, PCA should identify it. This last approach is analogous to NOMINATE
scores, which are used to measure the ­left-right dimension in the US Congress.
    We use all three methods. First, we regress a dummy indicator for a ­newspaper
being a Party Daily on the content variables, controlling for ­prefecture-by-year
fixed effects. From this regression, we compute the probability that a newspaper


    7
      The mean of the variable Epoch Stories reported in panel C of Table 1 is the average of the ratio across obser-
vations instead of the ratio of the average.
    8
      These articles on corruption are mostly related to l­ow-level officials. We only identify 13 cases concerning
prominent political leaders.
2454                                                             THE AMERICAN ECONOMIC REVIEW                                                     SEPTEMBER 2018



           Panel A                                                                    Panel B
                                                1                                                                       2

           Predicted log advertising revenue




                                                                                    Probability of being party daily
                                                0

                                                                                                                        1


                                               −1



                                                                                                                        0
                                               −2




                                               −3
                                                                                                                       −1
                                                    0   0.2   0.4   0.6   0.8   1                                           0   0.2   0.4   0.6   0.8   1
                                                        Principal components                                                    Principal components
                                                           (first dimension)                                                       (first dimension)


Figure 2. ­Expected Advertising Revenue and Probability to Be Party Daily versus PCA First Component




is a Party Daily based on its content alone. Second, we regress the logarithm of a
­newspaper’s advertising revenues on the nine content variables, again controlling for
 ­prefecture-by-year fixed effects. We use this regression to compute a ­newspaper’s
  expected advertising revenue based on its content alone. Finally, we employ PCA
  to capture the most important variations in our nine content categories. Online
  Appendix Table A2 reports the components and factor loadings of the PCA. Most
  notably, the first component accounts for approximately 36 percent of the variations.
       These three methods produce similar results. Figure 2 depicts a linear and almost
  perfect correlation of the PCA first component with the predicted probability that
  a newspaper is a Party Daily and with the expected advertising revenues. Figure 3
  plots the t­-statistic on each content category against the factor loadings of the first
  component. The content categories with positive factor loadings are all ­individually
  positively correlated with the probability of being a Party Daily and negatively
  ­correlated with advertising revenues, and vice versa for those with negative l­ oadings.
   The content categories all line up along one dimension; it is not the case that some
   categories are important for predicting advertising revenues and others are ­important
   for predicting whether a paper is a Party Daily. As a result, the PCA first compo-
   nent predicts advertising revenues almost as well as the unconstrained nine content
   ­categories. Quantitatively, in the same market and year, increasing political bias
    by one standard deviation is associated with a 33 percent decrease in ­advertising
    revenues.9

    9
      We regress log advertising revenues on bias, controlling for p­ refecture-by-year and administrative-­level fixed
effects. The estimated bias coefficient is −3.44 with a standard error of 0.79.
VOL. 108 NO. 9                                  QIN ET AL.: MEDIA BIAS IN CHINA                                      2455



             10
                                                                                                      Leader

                                                                                  Corruption Xinhua
              5                                                                   Disasters       Leader
                                                                                  Disasters Xinhua
                                                                                  Corruption

                                                              Accidents
              0                                               Accidents
                                     Sports
                         Entertainment
                          Crime       Sports
                                    Epoch
             −5           Crime
                                    Epoch
                         Entertainment
                                                                                          Party daily t-stat
                                                                                          Ad revenue t-stat
           −10

                  −0.4              −0.2              0                   0.2            0.4                   0.6

                                                    PCA first dimension


                                 Figure 3. ­Content Loadings in Three Bias Measures

Notes: The y­ -axis is the ­t-statistic for the coefficient of the Party Daily dummy variable (or negation of advertising
revenue) in a regression with each content variable being the dependent variable, controlling for ­prefecture-by-year
fixed effects. This is plotted against the factor loading for each content variable.




      Each individual factor loading is also sensible. For the Party Line, the
Leader Mentions variable has the strongest positive factor loading, followed
by Xinhua Cites, while Epoch Stories has a sizable negative factor loading. All
three Bottom Line measures, namely, Entertainment, Crime, and Sports, have
strong negative loadings. Concerning the Mass Line measures, Corruption and
Disasters have strong positive factor loadings, while the loading of Accidents is
modest.
      To further assess the credibility of the PCA first component as a measure of
media bias, we examine it for individual newspapers. Table A3 lists the top ten
and bottom ten papers in terms of our bias measure. In addition to People’s Daily,
the m  ­ ost-biased papers include nine provincial Party Dailies, among which eight
are from inland provinces where the media are believed to be less open than the
media in coastal provinces. The l­ east-biased newspapers are Subsidiaries from large
metropolitan areas, which are viewed as breeding the most commercial and free
media in China. Still, there exists a large variation in the bias measure within each
type of newspaper. A number of Party Dailies are less biased than some Evenings
and Subsidiaries, as shown in Figure A1. Interestingly, based on our measure, the
­least-biased Party Daily is Guangzhou Daily, which is well known as the largest
 advertising earner among all Chinese newspapers since 1993.
      Furthermore, we calculate the average value of the bias measure for all
 ­newspapers within a province. Panel A of Figure 4 demonstrates that this ­measure
  of average bias has a strong negative correlation with the index of regional
  ­competency constructed by Fan and Wang (2009), which is based largely on
   the degree of government involvement in the economy (e.g., the share of SOEs)
   and the role of markets in resource allocation. The bias measure is also strongly
2456                                                      THE AMERICAN ECONOMIC REVIEW                                       SEPTEMBER 2018



       Panel A                                                                  Panel B
                           QH                                                                                                         QH
   Residual bias     0.1               NX
                                                                                                0.1                            NX




                                                                              Residual bias
                    0.05          GS                                                           0.05                    GS


                      0                                             JS GD
                                                                                                 0          JS   GD
                                                                        SH                            SH
                   −0.05                                                                      −0.05
                                  4            6           8            10                            0.1        0.2   0.3   0.4    0.5
                      Regional competency index (2001–2009)                                      Share of deleted posts on Sina Weibo

   Panel C
                                                               QH
                     0.1
                                                                      NX
   Residual bias




                    0.05                                                GS


                      0           GD          JS
                                       SH
                   −0.05
                           0.02        0.03        0.04    0.05       0.06
                    Share of government users on Sina Weibo


            Figure 4. Correlations between Newspaper Bias and Other Measures of Political Control




p­ ositively correlated with the share of deleted posts (Bamman, O’Connor, and
 Smith 2012) and the share of government accounts (Qin, Strömberg, and Wu
 2017) on Sina Weibo, the most prominent online public platform in China. See
 panels B and C of Figure 4, respectively. In these figures, three provinces that are
 believed to have the m­ ost-developed media markets—Shanghai (SH), Guangdong
 (GD), and Jiangsu (JS)—have a low level of bias and are associated with a h­ igh
 level of regional competency and small shares of deleted posts and government
 accounts. An opposite pattern is observed in three l­ east-developed media markets:
 Qinghai (QH), Ningxia (NX), and Gansu (GS).

                                                                        D. Summary

    We consider a newspaper to be politically biased when it directs content
toward the CCP’s political goals. In this sense, the PCA first component is an
­appropriate measure of media bias. We conclude this section by highlighting
 several results. First, we find a strong pattern of product differentiation among
 newspapers along the p­ olitico-economic dimension. Second, we find that in the
 same m ­ arket and year, increasing political bias is associated with a substan-
 tial decrease in ­advertising r­evenues. Third, commercial newspapers act much
 less as g­overnment m    ­ outhpieces. For example, while Party Dailies mention
Party Leaders in 21 ­percent of their articles, Subsidiaries only mention them in
5 ­percent of their articles. Fourth, commercial papers do not cover more infor-
 mation r­ elevant to ­accountability, such as corruption. This difference implies that
 the massive entry of commercial ­newspapers in the 1990s (recall Figure 1) is
likely to reduce r­ eaders’ exposure to propaganda, but not to increase the amount
of i­nformation on c­ orruption and n­ egative outcomes that is relevant to holding
politicians accountable.
VOL. 108 NO. 9                                   QIN ET AL.: MEDIA BIAS IN CHINA                                     2457



                                         III. Theoretical Framework

      This section provides a structured discussion of how competition between local
governments affects media bias and newspaper entry. We sketch the theoretical frame-
work, leaving the formal model to the online Appendix. The framework has three
important features: (i) consumers have heterogeneous preferences for media bias
(propaganda) as opposed to ­non-political commercial content;10 (ii) the ownership of
 newspapers is decentralized to local governments (CCPCs), which have the autonomy
 to distribute profits and decide the level of bias and the entry of newspapers under their
 administration; and (iii) local governments have dual p­ olitico-economic goals—they
 care about (1) exposing the audience to biased content and (2) pursuing profits.
      These three features match the empirical setting described in Section II. They define
  a problem analogous to a ­product-positioning problem in the IO ­literature, except fea-
  ture (iii), which implies that a local government itself has a ­preference for the charac-
 teristic of a product (media bias) in addition to monetary payoffs.
      Regarding feature (iii), we assume that the political valuation of media bias
 d­ iffers across local governments. One ­microfounded explanation is that the political
 value created by bias exposure, such as regime stability, is a public good that can
 be used ­non-exclusively by other CCPCs in an area. Furthermore, political effects
 such as social unrest or protests are likely to have geographic spillovers. Thus, a
 ­lower-level CCPC that internalizes these spillovers less will value the political goal
  of bias exposure less than a h­ igher-level CCPC.11
      To facilitate the analysis, we make two further assumptions. First, a ­newspaper’s
profit consists of advertising revenues, which are determined by the size of its reader-
ship. This assumption is reasonable because subscription and retail prices of Chinese
newspapers are fixed by regulation, and revenues from circulation only account for
a small fraction of a newspaper’s total revenues. Second, readers are s­ ingle-homing
and consume either one or no newspaper. As long as consumers are not perfect
­multi-homing in the sense that they consume all available papers in exactly the same
 way, the basic results presented below hold, as shown in the online Appendix.

                             A. Product Differentiation and Competition

    We first analyze a single CCPC’s choice of media bias. In the online Appendix,
we formulate this problem as a location choice on a Hotelling line.12 Higher
bias delivers greater political value to the CCPC. However, readers with a taste
for commercial content pay an “ideology travel” cost when consuming a biased
­newspaper, and a sufficiently high cost will deter commercial readers from buying
 a biased newspaper. This generates a trade-off between the level of bias and the
 size of readership.


    10
       This is similar to the setup in Mullainathan and Shleifer’s (2005) theory of media bias. In the Chinese news-
paper setting, it is well supported by case studies (Zhao 1998) and readership survey evidence (Stockmann 2012);
see the online Appendix for further explanation.
    11
       It is similar to the argument that local governments do not fully internalize the benefits of national security
(e.g., Oates 1972; Inman and Rubinfeld 1997).
    12
       The Hotelling line is between [​​− 1/2 , 1/2 ]​​. A location closer to 1​ /2​means a higher level of bias (more pro-
paganda), and a location closer to ​− 1/2​means a lower level of bias (more commercial content).
2458                         THE AMERICAN ECONOMIC REVIEW                  SEPTEMBER 2018



      The elasticity of demand with respect to media bias creates a p­ olitico-economic
 trade-off. A newspaper without readers delivers neither profits nor political value.
 When choosing a lower level of bias, the CCPC bears a higher political cost because
 the audience is exposed to less bias. However, the size of the audience expands, which
 increases both profits and the reach of bias. Thus, the optimal level of bias increases
 in the political valuation of bias but decreases in the size of the advertising market.
      In this setup, the “ideology travel cost” allows the CCPC to segment the
 market using two papers. Consider the case that is empirically most relevant:
 a ­monopolistic CCPC owns two newspapers. The CCPC will never produce two
 identical papers. We call the more biased paper the Party paper and the other
 the commercial paper. The CCPC has no economic incentive to reduce the bias
 of the Party paper because such a reduction steals audience from its sibling
 ­commercial paper but has no effect on its aggregate profits. Consequently, the
  bias of the Party paper is optimally set to maximize the political effect of bias
  exposure. Meanwhile, reducing the bias of the commercial paper does not incur
  a high political cost because readers of the Party paper are not affected. Thus, the
  ­commercial paper entirely relieves the Party paper of commercial concerns, and
   the Party paper ­mitigates the political concerns of the commercial paper. Note that
   unless consumers are perfectly segmented into two markets without any switching
   between them, the commercial paper will cause a political cost for the CCPC, as
   it will still steal audience from the Party paper.
      Now, we discuss how competition hinders the m          ­ arket-segmentation strategy
   by adding a new paper owned by another CCPC to the t­wo-paper scenario above.
   Empirically, we examine how the exit of c­ ounty-level Party Dailies affected the bias
   of prefectural papers. Given the strong evidence that ­lower-level Party papers are
   less biased than their h­ igher-level counterparts, we assume that this ­competing paper
   is ­medium-biased, located between the bias positions of the (prefectural) Party
and commercial papers. In this case, when reducing its bias, the Party paper steals
­audience from the m     ­ edium-biased paper of another owner. Thus, the Party paper
 cares about both bias exposure and economic profits. Similarly, the ­commercial
 paper has an incentive to move closer to its ­medium-biased competitor to mitigate
 the b­ usiness-stealing effect. Therefore, the presence of a m ­ edium-biased ­competitor
 reduces the incumbent CCPC’s incentive for product differentiation; its exit causes
 the opposite consequence. The following p­roposition summarizes the analysis
 above.

PROPOSITION 1 (Product Differentiation): Consider a CCPC with a
­politico-economic goal that chooses the degree of bias of its newspapers.

   a. When the advertising market is sufficiently large, the CCPC will run two dif-
       ferentiated newspapers: a highly biased Party paper targeting exclusively
       political goals and a ­low-biased commercial paper targeting primarily eco-
       nomic goals.

   b. The exit of a paper owned by another CCPC that is positioned between the
       Party and commercial papers will increase the differentiation between the two
       existing papers.
VOL. 108 NO. 9                         QIN ET AL.: MEDIA BIAS IN CHINA                      2459



   c. Newspaper bias weakly decreases with the size of the advertising market and
       weakly increases with the political valuation of media bias.


                       B. Newspaper Entry and Market Dynamics

      In this section, we analyze the entry decisions of a ­higher-level CCPC (​H​) and a
­lower-level CCPC (​L)​ , where ​H​has a higher political valuation of media bias than
 ​L​. The two CCPCs n­ oncooperatively decide whether to launch a newspaper and
  what type of newspaper to launch.
      It is ­well known that equilibria are not tractable in a continuous Hotelling model
  when competing locations are more than two (e.g., Lerner and Singer 1937). To
  keep the analysis tractable, we assume that a newspaper’s bias is a binary choice
  between two fixed positions: a Party paper with high bias and a Commercial paper
  with low bias. Given these fixed positions, consumers will be divided into three
  ­categories based on their preference ordering: (i) a share ​d​ p​​​​ are Party Cadres who
prefer a Party paper to a Commercial paper to no newspaper; (ii) a share ​d​ c​​​​ are
Commercial Audience who prefer a Commercial paper to no paper to a Party paper;
and importantly (iii) a share ​​ds​​​​ are Switchers who prefer a Commercial paper to
Party paper to no newspaper.
      Newspapers enter as the advertising market grows. As the first entrant, a Party
paper will yield both political and economic benefits while a Commercial paper will
yield only economic benefits. Because the size of the advertising market is initially
small, the first paper in the market will be a Party paper. Because ​H​values political
benefits more, it will enter the market earlier. The demand for this paper is ​d​ p​​​  + ​d​s​​​
since both Party Cadres and Switchers read it.
      If ​H​were to next introduce a Commercial paper, it would benefit economically
from market expansion, ​​dc​​​  ,​but at a political cost of reducing the reach of the Party
paper’s bias because Switchers (​​ds​​​​) will move to the Commercial paper. If instead, L ​​
launches a Commercial paper, the same economic benefits and political costs occur,
but ​L​cares less about the political cost and gains the economic benefit of stealing
Switchers from H                               ​ ​will launch a Commercial paper before H
                     ​ ​ ’s Party paper. Thus, L                                          ​ ​.
      An alternative is that ​L​launches a Party paper before any Commercial paper. In
this case, the political cost and economic benefits for both H and L to subsequently
launch a Commercial paper are symmetric, and L             ​ ​will introduce the Commercial
paper earlier because it cares less about the political cost. Reasoning along this line
yields the following results.

PROPOSITION 2 (Vertical Competition and Market Entry): Suppose that a CCPC
with higher valuation of media bias (H) and a CCPC with lower valuation of media
bias (L) coexist in a market. Both H and L can produce a Party and/or a commer-
cial paper.

   a. The first paper in the market will be ­H-Party.

   b. The first commercial paper in the market will be ­L-Commercial.
2460                         THE AMERICAN ECONOMIC REVIEW                  SEPTEMBER 2018



   c. Competition between the CCPCs facilitates the entry of commercial papers.

   d. There are two equilibrium newspaper entry sequences: {­H-Party, ­L-Party,
       ­L-Commercial, ­H-Commercial} and {­H-Party, ­L-Commercial, ­H-Commercial,
        ­L-Party}.

    Point c above is worth noting. Competition between CCPCs facilitates the entry
of commercial papers for two reasons. First, market stealing increases the economic
benefits of launching a commercial paper. This implies that ­L-Commercial will
enter the market at a lower level of advertising revenue than if it were a monopo-
list. Second, the existence of ­L-Commercial will spur the entry of ­H-Commercial,
because the political cost of having a commercial paper in the market has already
been inflicted.
    The results above apply to provincial capital cities in which the provincial and
prefectural CCPCs produce both types of newspapers. In n­ on-capital prefectures,
it is typical that the ­lower-level (county) CCPC is allowed to produce only a Party
paper. In this setting, the following result can be obtained.

PROPOSITION 3 (­Politico-Economic Factors and Market Entry): Suppose that a
CCPC with higher valuation of media bias (H) and a CCPC with lower ­valuation
of media bias (L) coexist in a market and that H can produce both Party and
­commercial papers while L can only produce a Party paper. Then, the political
 ­valuation of media bias will facilitate the entry of ­H-Party and hinder the entry of
  ­H-Commercial but have no effect on the entry of ­L-Party.

    The economic mechanisms that drive these results are similar to those ­underlying
Proposition 2. Because the first paper in the market receives a double dividend
of both political and economic benefits, the entry of ­H-Party is facilitated by a
higher p­ olitical valuation of media bias. By attracting Switchers from ­H-Party,
­H-Commercial imposes a political cost on its owner; its entry is hindered by a higher
 valuation of this political cost. The last result is simply the consequence of the ­public
 good nature of the political value of media bias.
    Propositions 1­ –3 hinge on the assumed demand structure under which a com-
 mercial paper steals audience from a Party paper and thus incurs a political cost of
 reducing exposure to the bias produced by the Party paper. These results will not
 hold if the markets are completely segregated across newspaper formats so that there
 are no Switchers or there is perfect m   ­ ulti-homing so that all switchers read both
 the Party and commercial papers whenever available. Empirical evidence consistent
 with these propositions rejects the conjectures of complete market segregation and
 perfect ­multi-homing, as we will show in the next sections.

                               IV. Competition and Bias

   In this section, we estimate the causal effects of competition on media bias across
newspaper types and administrative levels by exploiting a reform that led to the
drastic exit of most c­ ounty-level newspapers. The empirical setting is 36 p­ refectural
markets that have newspaper archives available in WiseNews. In the 1980s and
VOL. 108 NO. 9                               QIN ET AL.: MEDIA BIAS IN CHINA                                 2461



1990s, a large number of prefecture- and county-level newspapers entered these
markets. Per regulation, the prices of newspapers were fixed. Newspapers competed
mostly through readership, which determined advertising revenues.

                                              A. Background

    Because digital archives of county newspapers are not available, we are unable
to characterize their content. Interviews with industry experts suggest that many
­county-level newspapers, despite being restricted to Party Dailies, were c­ ompetitive
 with their prefectural counterparts. Under the slogan “Party papers in nature, Evening
 papers in practice,” they imitated the style of commercial papers and covered more
 ­county-specific events (Zhang and Zhou 2004). In early 2000, nearly one-half of the
  county Dailies in coastal provinces earned sizable advertising revenues.13

     ­Closing-County-Dailies Reform.—In 2003, the central government withdrew the
licenses of more than 80 percent of the c­ ounty-level newspapers. As stated in the
policy directive “Further Actions to Curb Forced Subscription of Newspapers and
Reduce Financial Burden on Farmers,” the purposes of this reform were to reduce
the fiscal burden on local governments and to curb massive protests by farmers,
who were mandated by county governments to subscribe to their newspapers. The
­implementation of this reform resulted in a sharp decline in the number of county
 papers from 325 in 2002 to 75 in 2004 (recall Figure 1).14 Within the markets
 ­analyzed in this study, there were nearly 60 county Dailies in 2002 but fewer than 10
  in 2004. Among the closed newspapers, many operated in w     ­ ell-developed counties
  with populations more than 1 million and were profitable.

    Mapping between Theory and Empirics.—The theoretical setup in Section III
is that an ­upper-level CCPC owns two newspapers (one Party paper and one com-
mercial paper), which compete with the Party paper owned by a ­lower-level CCPC.
Upon the exit of the l­ower-level paper, the u­ pper-level CCPC becomes a monopo-
list, and its incentive to differentiate the two papers increases. The actual empirical
setting is more complicated. Among the 36 markets in the sample, 8 non-­provincial-
capital prefectures match the model precisely; after the reform, the prefectural CCPC
monopolized the market with two types of newspapers. Another 8 p­ rovincial-capital
markets also resemble the model in one market segment. In these markets, there
existed only one provincial Party paper but several commercial papers owned by
either the provincial or prefectural CCPC. Normally, prefectural papers are less
biased than provincial papers. Thus, before the reform, the three m  ­ ost-biased (and
most substitutable) newspapers were: the Provincial Party Daily, the County Daily,
and the Provincial Commercial paper. Therefore, the logic of the model applies: the


    13
       Reported by the Association of Chinese County Newspapers, in 2002, 96 county Party Dailies earned an
annual advertising revenue more than RMB 1 million Yuan, and 38 of them earned more than 4 million Yuan
(Chinese Journalism Yearbook, 2003, pp. ­84–91.)
    14
       Exceptions included newspapers that were launched before 1949; those published by c­ ounty level, autono-
mous, ethnic minority administrations or in ethnic minority languages; and those in counties with an exceptionally
large population.
2462                                           THE AMERICAN ECONOMIC REVIEW                           SEPTEMBER 2018



exit of county Party papers increases the provincial government’s incentive to differ-
entiate its products. We define these 16 markets as the main sample.
   In the remaining markets, there were two owners after the county papers were
closed: the provincial and prefectural CCPCs, each running a Party Daily and mul-
tiple commercial papers. A typical ordering of these papers in terms of bias, from
high to low, is as follows: provincial Party Daily, prefectural Party Daily, provincial
commercial paper, and prefectural commercial paper. The exit of county papers,
whose bias was likely to lie between the Party Dailies and the commercial papers,
arguably affected the product differentiation to some extent, but these markets bore
less resemblance to the model. Thus, we define them as being outside the main sam-
ple. We will estimate the effects of the reform in both the main sample (containing
286 ­newspaper-year observations) and the full sample (872 observations).

                                                      B. Estimation

   The 2003 reform generates a variation that allows us to estimate the effect of
the reduced competition on newspaper bias. Specifically, we create a variable,
Reform_2003, which is the interaction between (i) the number of ­county-level
newspapers in a prefecture in 2002 and (ii) an indicator variable for the year 2003 or
later. This interaction term measures the decline in the number of newspapers if all
county papers existing in 2002 were closed due to the reform.
   Consider the example of the Shenzhen prefecture. In 2002, four CCPCs were
competing in the market: one prefectural CCPC and three county CCPCs. The
WiseNews sample includes four prefectural papers: one Party Daily, one Evening,
and two Subsidiaries. By 2004, all three county newspapers were closed. Thus, the​
Reform _ 2003​variable is 0 before 2003 and 3 in 2003 and thereafter.
   We estimate the effect of the reform using the following d­ ifference-in-differences
(DID) specification:

(1)    ​bia​si​jt​​  = ​δ​i​​  + ​δ​t​​  + ​β​1​​  Reform_​2003​jt​​  + ​β​2​​  Reform_​2003​jt​​  × Commercia​l​i​​

                      + ​X​  ′j ​t​  γ + ​ϵ​ijt​​​.

The variable b​ ia​s​ijt​​​is our measure of newspaper bias for newspaper i​​in prefecture j​ ​
at year ​t.​ The variables ​​δ​i​​​and ​​δt​ ​​​are newspaper and y­ ear fixed effects. The variable​
 Commercia​li​​​​is a dummy for the newspaper being a commercial paper (either Party
Evening or Subsidiary). The t­ime-varying controls ​​X​jt​​​include a set of variables (all
in logarithm) at the prefecture level: population, GDP, total employment, and real
foreign direct investment (FDI). Standard errors are clustered by prefectures.
    Our primary hypothesis is that the markets of the county Party Dailies and of the
­higher-level newspapers (both Party and commercial papers) are connected, such
that the latter adjust their bias in response to the exit of the county papers. According
to Proposition 1, the coefficient ​​β2​ ​​​should be negative because the differentiation
between Party and commercial papers is expected to increase in areas where com-
peting papers owned by other CCPCs exit. We also expect ​​β1​ ​​​to be positive and the
sum of ​​β​1​​​and ​​β​2​​​to be negative, as Proposition 1 predicts that Party papers will
become more biased while commercial papers will become less so.
VOL. 108 NO. 9                               QIN ET AL.: MEDIA BIAS IN CHINA                                 2463



          Table 2—Effects of Competition on Media Bias (Dependent Variable: Newspaper Bias)

                                       (1)           (2)          (3)          (4)          (5)           (6)
Reform 2003                     −0.002    −0.001                0.018      0.030
                                                                             0.019                       0.036
                                  (0.003)   (0.003)            (0.007)    (0.011)
                                                                            (0.007)                     (0.008)
Commercial paper × Reform 2003                                −0.024    −0.038
                                                                           −0.024                     −0.044
                                                               (0.006)    (0.007)
                                                                            (0.007)                     (0.006)
Reform 2003 outside main sample                                         −0.015                        −0.025
                                                                          (0.012)                       (0.010)
Commercial Paper × Reform 2003                                             0.018                         0.026
   outside main sample                                                    (0.009)                       (0.010)
Observations                        872       872      872       872        872                           872
R2                                 0.832     0.833    0.841     0.842      0.847                         0.852
Controls                            No        Yes      No        Yes        No                            Yes
Fixed effects                   Newspaper Newspaper Newspaper Newspaper Newspaper                     Newspaper
                                 and Year  and Year  and Year  and Year  and Year                      and Year
Commercial                                            0.014     0.025      0.133                         0.038

Notes: Commercial paper is a dummy for being a commercial paper as opposed to a Party paper. Reform 2003 is
the interaction of the number of county papers in 2002 with a dummy for being in and after 2003. The main ­sample
includes 16 markets that resemble the setup of the theoretical model. Controls include GDP, population, industrial
share of GDP, and Real FDI. Standard errors are clustered by prefecture in parentheses.




   Table 2 presents the main results. Columns 1, 3, and 5 display the regressions
in which we include only newspaper and year fixed effects; the other columns add
the controls of prefectural characteristics. The first two columns show the average
effect of the reform across all newspapers. The estimated effect of the reform is
small and insignificant in both specifications. The next two columns include the
interaction term between the reform and a dummy for commercial newspapers as
in (1). The main effect (on Party Dailies) is positive and significant at the 5 percent
level, whereas the coefficient of the interaction term is negative and significant at
the 1 percent level. The ­F-test of the zero sum of the main and interaction effects
(see the bottom row) reveals that the estimated effect of the reform on the bias of
commercial papers is significantly negative.
   The last two columns extend specification (1) to estimate the effects both in and
outside the main sample. We interact all variables, including the fixed effects, with
a dummy for being outside the main sample. The regression including the controls
(column 6) shows that the estimated effects in the main sample are statistically
significant and quantitatively larger than those in the rest of the full sample. For
example, the estimated coefficient on the reform dummy is 0.036 within the main
sample and 0.011 (= 0.­036 − 0.025) outside the main sample.
   The results above demonstrate that competition matters for media bias in both the
horizontal dimension (across newspaper types) and the vertical dimension (across
levels of government). The results lend strong support to the theoretical mechanism
that the exit of l­ow-level Party Dailies increases u­ pper-level CCPCs’ incentive to
differentiate their products so that each newspaper type is better targeted toward
one goal, either political or economic. Before relating these results to the effects
on specific news content, we examine their robustness. Our examination primarily
draws on the results generated from the main sample, which matches the theory
more closely.
2464                                THE AMERICAN ECONOMIC REVIEW                             SEPTEMBER 2018



         0.1




        0.05




          0




       −0.05

                             Reform 2003
                             Reform 2003 × commercial
        −0.1
               1999   2000   2001    2002    2003       2004   2005   2006   2007   2008   2009   2010


                       Figure 5. Year-by-Year Dynamic Effects of the 2003 Reform




                                              C. Robustness

      Existence of Pre-Trend.—The key assumption for the DID identification above
is that absent the 2003 reform, a common trend existed with regard to newspaper
bias across prefectures with different numbers of county newspapers. Although this
assumption is not directly testable, we can examine the existence of a p­ re-trend
in the data. To this end, we replace the variable Reform_2003 in the specification
used in column 4 of Table 2 with a set of variables containing the number of county
papers in 2002 interacted with a dummy variable for each individual year. Figure
5 plots, ­year-by-year, the estimated coefficients for Party papers (the upper line)
and for commercial papers (the lower line) from the regression using the main
­sample. There is no visible trend before 2003, but the effect of the reform is notable
 ­immediately following the reform. The gap between the two types of newspapers
  increases continuously over the period of 2­ 003–2005 and then remains stable for the
  rest of the sample period.
      In Figure 6, we plot the average residual bias in the main sample for the Party
and commercial papers in two types of markets: (i) “treatment” markets in which
  the number of county papers in 2002 is above the median level, and the competitive
  pressure is high; and (ii) comparison markets in which the number of county papers
  is below the median, and the competitive pressure is relatively low. The residual
  bias is computed from the regression in column 4 of Table 2. We normalize the
  bias in 2002 to 0 as a benchmark and calculate the bias in other years relative to
  this benchmark. Let Party (Commercial) H denote the Party (commercial) papers
  in the “treatment” markets, and Party (Commercial) L for those in the comparison
  ­markets. Although the results in Figure 6 are less precise, the dynamics of the plot-
   ted bias is similar to the pattern in Figure 5.
      In terms of regression, we add a placebo reform in 2002 to the basic regression.
As shown in Table 3, this placebo effect (the coefficients of R    ​ eform_2002​and the
   interaction terms) is small and insignificant both within and outside the main sample.
VOL. 108 NO. 9                               QIN ET AL.: MEDIA BIAS IN CHINA                               2465



             0.2



             0.1



              0




           −0.1




           −0.2


                        2000   2001   2002   2003    2004   2005   2006     2007    2008   2009   2010

                                                Party H                   Party L
                                                Commercial H              Commercial L



                   Figure 6. Bias by Newspaper Type and Degree of Reduced Competition



      Differential Trends in Prefectures.—One concern is that prefectures with many
  county papers would have experienced a different ­trend-shift than other p­ refectures
after 2003, even without the reform. To test such a possibility, we predict the
­number of county papers in 2002 based on the controls in the regressions. We then
 interact this predicted variable with the reform dummy and define this interac-
 tion together with the previous controls of prefectural characteristics as extended
 ­controls. Including these extended controls has little impact on the estimated effects
  (­column 3 of Table 3).15

    Other Concurrent Impacts.—Our estimated effect of the 2003 reform may be
contaminated if there were other concurrent policy or industrial changes that might
have had a differentiated impact on prefectures with a different number of county
papers in 2002. We read multiple volumes of the Chinese Journalism Yearbook
and Chinese Newspaper Yearbook, which document significant media policy and
­industry changes. Except for the reform we explore, the only significant change in
 2003 was the formation of newspaper groups in two provincial capital cities (Wuhan
 and Hefei). Excluding these two prefectures from the sample does not change any of
 the previous regression results; see column 2 of Table A4.

   ­County-Level Content.—It is potentially possible that after a county paper was
closed, the corresponding ­upper-level Party Daily was mandated to report more
on county news, and this coverage was correlated with the content categories that
contribute to our bias measure (e.g., Leader Mentions). This would mechanically
lead to more material targeted toward the political goal and an increase in our bias

   15
      In the online Appendix, we also show that the inclusion of the extended controls does not change the esti-
mates in Table 2 (see Column 3 of Table A4).
2466                                    THE AMERICAN ECONOMIC REVIEW                              SEPTEMBER 2018



                           Table 3—Examination of the Existence of Pre-Trend

                                                                                   Newspaper bias
                                                                       (1)                (2)               (3)

Main effects (effects in main sample)
Reform 2002                                                           0.006              0.005            0.006
                                                                     (0.016)            (0.014)          (0.014)
Reform 2003                                                           0.024              0.032            0.035
                                                                     (0.012)            (0.010)          (0.009)
Commercial paper × Reform 2002                                      −0.010             −0.007           −0.008
                                                                     (0.014)            (0.013)          (0.013)
Commercial paper × Reform 2003                                      −0.031             −0.038           −0.038
                                                                     (0.011)            (0.010)          (0.009)

Variables interacted with outside main sample dummy
Reform 2002                                                         −0.001               0.000          −0.000
                                                                     (0.016)            (0.015)          (0.015)
Reform 2003                                                         −0.013             −0.021           −0.023
                                                                     (0.014)            (0.012)          (0.011)
Commercial paper × Reform 2002                                        0.007              0.005            0.006
                                                                     (0.015)            (0.014)          (0.014)
Commercial paper × Reform 2003                                        0.012              0.020            0.021
                                                                     (0.014)            (0.012)          (0.012)

Observations                                                           872                872               845
R2                                                                   0.847              0.852             0.852
Controls                                                              No                Basic           Extended
Fixed effects                                                      Newspaper          Newspaper         Newspaper
                                                                    and year           and year          and year

Notes: Reform 2002 and Reform 2003 are the interaction of the number of county papers in 2002 with a dummy
for being in and after 2002/3. Commercial paper is a dummy for being a commercial paper as opposed to a Party
paper. The main sample includes 16 markets that resemble the setup of the theoretical model. Basic controls include
GDP, population, industrial share of GDP, and real FDI as in Table 2. Extended controls also include the interaction
term between the predicted number of county Dailies in 2002 and the reform dummy variable. Standard errors are
clustered by prefecture in parentheses.




measure. To test this, we calculate the share of articles that mentioned the two key
political positions (Party secretary and government chiefs) at the county and village
levels. Table A5 shows that the share of articles mentioning these b­ ottom-level lead-
ers is virtually unaffected by the reform, while the share of articles mentioning the
­higher-level leaders is significantly affected.

   S­ upply-Side Changes Associated with the Reform.—One might be concerned
that after the reform, county Party papers merged with u­ pper-level newspapers.
However, this was rare in reality. In the main sample, there was no such case. In the
full sample, there was only one merger case: in Guangzhou, a county paper named
Panyu Daily was merged into the Guangzhou Daily group. The estimated effects are
essentially unchanged when Guangzhou is excluded from the full sample.
    Another possibility is that after the reform, the journalists who were previously
employed by the county papers moved to the prefectural papers. In general, the
mobility of journalists across newspapers was very low during the sample period.
News reports showed that because the employment policy of Party Dailies was rigid
VOL. 108 NO. 9                       QIN ET AL.: MEDIA BIAS IN CHINA                     2467



and commercial papers were unwilling to hire the journalists released by the closed
county papers, these released journalists faced a difficult time finding new jobs (Yao
2003). Furthermore, to account for the opposite effects of the reform on Party and
commercial papers, these two types of newspapers must have absorbed the released
journalists in a highly selective way, which is unlikely in practice.

                            D. Magnitude and Interpretation

    To further verify the effects of the reform and interpret the results, we illustrate
the effects of the reform on the nine content categories from which our bias mea-
sure is constructed. Figure 7 plots the ­t-statistics of the reform effect (​​β1​ ​​​) and the
negation of the interaction effect (​− ​β2​ ​​​) from equation (1) against the PCA factor
 loadings within the main sample. Consistent with the previous regression result, the
 effects of the reform on the individual content categories line up along one dimen-
 sion. Not surprisingly, we lose some degree of statistical precision by studying indi-
 vidual components. Nevertheless, the coefficients of three content categories are
 significant: two Party Line categories (Leader Mentions and Epoch Stories) and one
 Bottom Line category (Entertainment).
    The magnitude of the estimated effects is sizable. In Table A6, we rescale the
­coefficients to measure the magnitude of the effects of the reform. For instance, we
 estimate that the reform increased Leader Mentions in Party papers by 8.23 ­percent
 and increased the difference in Leader Mentions between Party and commercial
 papers by 9.13 percent. Thus, the reform caused a decline in Leader Mentions
 by nearly 1 percent in commercial papers. Similarly, the reform is estimated to
 have reduced the share of articles in commercial papers that cite Xinhua News by
 6.2 percent.
    We also provide statistics that put the magnitude of these effects in perspective
(the last three rows of Table A6). For example, political leaders are mentioned in 9.71
 percent of the articles, while the average difference between Party and ­commercial
 papers is 14.78 percent. Hence, the estimated increase in the gap between Party and
 commercial papers (9.13) is approximately 62 percent of the average gap (14.78).
 Similar results hold for the aggregate bias measure.

                            V. Market Entry and Media Bias

    The results in the previous section demonstrate that the markets of the
n­ ewspapers run by lower and ­higher-level CCPCs are not segregated. Therefore,
 the entry decisions of these CCPCs are likely to be interdependent. In this section,
 we further explore whether the entry sequences are consistent with the theoretical
 predictions in Propositions 2 and 3. Before testing them, we provide descriptive
 evidence regarding what economic and political factors are correlated with the
 level of media bias.

                        A. Factors Correlated with Media Bias

   We regress the bias measure on the newspaper type, the owner CCPC’s
­administrative level, and regional characteristics. This regression is used simply to
2468                                       THE AMERICAN ECONOMIC REVIEW                                          SEPTEMBER 2018



                                               Reform effect by content category

              3                                                                                              Leader
                                                                                                             Leader

              2

                                                                                                        Xinhua
              1
                                                                      Accidents
                                                                      Accidents
                                                                                           Corruption
                                                                                           Disasters Xinhua
              0
                          Crime                                                            Disasters
                                     Sports                                                Corruption
                                     Sports
            −1            Crime

                         Entertainment
            −2           Entertainment

                                    Epoch
                                    Epoch
            −3
                  −0.4              −0.2                      0                0.2                0.4                 0.6
                                                         PCA first dimension

                                            Reform (t-stat)       −Commercial paper × reform (t-stat)



         Figure 7. Effects of the 2003 Reform on Content Category versus PCA Factor Loadings




characterize areas with high media bias without any causal claim. Specifically, we
use two variables to capture regional differences in political valuation. The first is​
CCP _ Stronghold​ , which is the share of counties in the newspaper’s home prefecture
that were passed through during the CCP Red Army Long March of ­1933–1935 or
that were part of a CCP Revolution Base (soviet) before 1949. The second is a dummy
variable, ​TreatyPorts​ , which is equal to 1 if the newspaper’s home p­ refecture was
ever conceded to Western powers from 1840 to 1910 as constructed by Jia (2014).
Historically, these Treaty Port areas had greater exposure to Western culture and a
free press. We use a proxy for the size of the advertising market in a p­ refecture by
scaling the p­ refecture-level GDP with the ratio of newspaper a­ dvertising ­revenues
to GDP at the national level. We also include a prefecture’s population, distance to
Beijing, its latitude and longitude, and the number of newspapers in the prefecture
in 1895.
    Table 4 reports the results. The first column includes only ­year fixed effects; the
second column includes year and prefecture fixed effects; and the third c­ olumn
includes y­ear-by-prefecture fixed effects. A newspaper’s administrative level
strongly predicts its bias. In particular, prefectural papers are less biased than
­provincial papers, which in turn are significantly less biased than central papers.16


    16
       One concern is that we focus on only a few top political positions (e.g., Party secretaries and mayors) at the
local level, while for national leaders we include some other positions. A small share of Leader Mentions and thus
a smaller bias for local newspapers may be driven by the omission of other local leaders. To assess this possibility,
we manually read all articles published on three randomly selected days in six newspapers: one Party Daily and one
commercial paper at each of the three administrative levels. We find that the coverage of political leaders in both
local and national newspapers focuses on the top positions for which we searched to a similar extent. See online
Appendix Section A3.6 for further details.
VOL. 108 NO. 9                                QIN ET AL.: MEDIA BIAS IN CHINA                                 2469



                            Table 4—Factors Correlated with Newspaper Bias

                                                             (1)                     (2)                    (3)
Province                                                  −0.106                  −0.117                  −0.116
                                                           (0.009)                 (0.005)                 (0.006)
Prefecture                                                −0.148                  −0.167                  −0.165
                                                           (0.011)                 (0.010)                 (0.013)
Party evening                                             −0.124                  −0.131                  −0.131
                                                           (0.013)                 (0.012)                 (0.016)
Subsidiary                                                −0.176                  −0.173                  −0.173
                                                           (0.011)                 (0.012)                 (0.015)
Newspaper Ad Mkt (log10 RMB 2011)                         −0.036                  −0.018
                                                           (0.014)                 (0.090)
Treaty port                                               −0.025
                                                           (0.010)
Long march                                                  0.049
                                                           (0.010)
Observations                                                 905                    905                    905
R2                                                          0.672                  0.708                  0.781
Fixed effects                                               Year            Year and Prefecture          Year by
                                                                                                        Prefecture
Province = Prefecture ( p-value)                            0.000                  0.000                  0.000
Evening = Subsidiary ( p-value)                             0.000                  0.001                  0.007

Notes: The unit of analysis is newspaper by year. The regression in column 1 controls for distance to Beijing, lat-
itude, and longitude. The last two rows report the p-value of the F-test. Standard errors clustered by prefecture in
parentheses.



Newspapers in areas with greater advertising revenues are less biased. However,
when the p­ refecture fixed effects are included, the coefficient is reduced by one-half
and is statistically insignificant.
  As expected, newspapers in historical CCP strongholds are more biased,
whereas newspapers in historical Treaty Port areas are less biased. Later,
we will use the predicted bias based on the variables ​                CCP _ Stronghold​
and ​TreatyPorts​to measure the political valuation of media bias in each prefecture.
We call this variable Expected_Political_Value. According to column 1 of Table 4,​
Expected _ Political _ Value = − 0.025 × TreatyPorts + 0.049 × Long _ March​.

                                   B. Sequence of Newspaper Entry

    We have found that the markets of newspapers across administrative levels are
not segmented and that ­lower-level newspapers are less biased. These findings
have implications for the predicted sequence of newspaper entry, as spelled out by
Proposition 2. An examination of these predictions provides further evidence to
test whether competition from ­lower-level governments erodes the political goals
of ­higher-level governments, notably through the entry of commercial newspapers.
    To this end, we analyze the sequence of newspaper entry during the ­1981–2011
period in 27 provincial capital cities, excluding 4 provincial cities (i.e., Beijing,
Chongqing, Shanghai, and Tianjin). In these 27 markets, a provincial CCPC and a
prefectural CCPC compete with both Party and commercial newspapers. All mar-
kets are classified by the patterns of newspaper entry, as displayed in Table 5.
2470                                  THE AMERICAN ECONOMIC REVIEW                                SEPTEMBER 2018



       To simplify the notation, we use four letters (​ P, C, p, c)​to represent what newspa-
 pers are in the market, whereby the letter indicates whether the newspaper is a Party
 or commercial paper, and the case indicates whether the paper is run by an upper- or
 ­lower-level CCPC. For example, the first row of Table 5 shows that in two markets,
  we observe the existence of a provincial Party paper (​P)​ in 1981, followed by the
  entry of a prefectural commercial paper (​c)​ , a provincial commercial paper (​C​), and
  a prefectural Party paper ( ​p​) by 2011. The second row shows that in another five
  markets, we observe the entry sequence ​P, c, C​ , but no entry of a prefectural Party
    paper ( ​p​). In all the other markets, the entry of the first paper is not observed.
       Based on Table 5, we investigate the four theoretical predictions in Proposition 2.
    The “Theoretical prediction” columns show whether an entry sequence is consistent
    with the specific prediction (T for True and F for False). The theory predicts two
    equilibrium sequences. The last column indicates the equilibrium sequence (1 or
    2) with which the entry sequence is consistent. To show how likely the observed
    outcomes are to occur by chance, in the last row, we calculate the probability for the
    observed entry sequences under the assumptions of random and independent entry.
    Under these two assumptions, if the probability of observing the predicted outcome
    in one market is p​ ​ , then the probability of observing the predicted outcome in k​ ​of ​n​
  markets is binomially distributed.
       Proposition 2a predicts that the first paper in the market will be an ­upper-level
  (provincial) Party paper because the provincial CCPC values bias more. In all seven
  markets in which the entry of the first paper is observed, this prediction is true. If the
  entry is random, conditional on the first paper being a Party paper, the probability
  that it will be a provincial Party paper in all seven cases is less than 0.01. However,
  such an observed outcome could occur for various reasons. We examine some more
  specific predictions of the model.
       Proposition 2b predicts that the first commercial paper will be launched by the
  ­lower-level (prefectural) CCPC. This prediction is key to understanding whether
   ­lower-level governments erode the political goals of h­ igher-level governments. It is
    testable in 26 markets, and the entry pattern in 22 markets is as predicted.17 Under
random entry, the probability of such an outcome is 2 in 10,000.
       The prediction above relies on the premise that the markets for commercial
 and Party papers are connected, such that commercial papers steals business from
­preexisting Party papers. This ­business-stealing mechanism differs in the two entry
 sequences. In the first case, when there is only one provincial Party paper in the
 market, the prefectural CCPC has both economic and political incentives to start the
 first commercial paper to steal business from the provincial CCPC. Hence, it is not
 surprising that we observe market configuration P         ​ c​in 14 cases but P​ C​in only one
 case. In the second case, both CCPCs have ­preexisting Party papers, and launching
 a commercial paper will steal business not only from the competing CCPC but also
 from the sibling Party paper. The prediction of a transition from P                 ​ pc​ arises
                                                                              ​ p​to P
only if the prefectural CCPC values the political cost resulting from business steal-
ing less. Empirically, the predicted market development is observed in 8 of 10 mar-
kets. The probability of such an outcome under random entry is 0.04.

    17
       The first six rows of Table 5 contain a total of 22 markets that are all consistent with this prediction ( T in
column 2b). The three rows (with F in column 2b) contain the 4 markets that violate the prediction.
VOL. 108 NO. 9                                QIN ET AL.: MEDIA BIAS IN CHINA                                   2471



                        Table 5—Entry Sequences in 27 Provincial Capital Cities

                              Newspapers in market                     Theoretical prediction
                                                                                                        Equilibrium
Markets                   1      2           3        4         2a         2b         2c         2d      sequence
2                        P      Pc         PCc      PCpc         T         T           T         T          1
5                        P      Pc         PCc                   T         T           T         T          1
5                               Pc         PCc      PCpc                   T           T         T          1
1                               Pc         PCc                             T           T         T          1
1                               Pc                  PCpc                   T                                1
8                               Pp         Ppc      PCpc                   T                     T          2
1                               Pp                  PCpc                                                    2
1                               PC         PCp      PCpc                    F                     F
1                                          PCp      PCpc                    F                     F
2                                Pp        PCp      PCpc                    F                     F
Prob/Random                                                    0.008     0.0002     0.0001      2e-07

Notes: Newspaper types are indicated by letters: P for provincial Party Daily, p for prefectural Party Daily, C for
provincial commercial paper, and c for prefectural commercial paper. There are two equilibrium sequences pre-
dicted by the theory; 1 (or 2) means the entry sequence is consistent with prediction 1 (or 2). In the Theoretical
prediction columns, T means consistency with the specific theoretical prediction, while F means inconsistency. The
last row reports the probability of the observed outcome under random entry.




     Proposition 2c states that competition between CCPCs facilitates the entry of
  commercial papers. In other words, the existence of a l­ ower-level commercial paper
  will spur the entry of an u­ pper-level commercial paper. In a market with a ­provincial
 Party paper, after the entry of a prefectural commercial paper, we expect to observe
 the immediate entry of a provincial commercial paper instead of the entry of a
 ­prefectural Party paper. This prediction holds in all 13 markets where we observe
  the next newspaper after configuration P  ​ c​ (the transition from P       ​ Cc​in the first
                                                                       ​ c​to P
four rows). The probability of this outcome under random entry is approximately 1
in 10,000.
     Finally, Proposition 2d characterizes the two possible equilibrium entry sequences
of all four newspaper formats. We only observe the entire entry sequence in two
markets (the first row), which is consistent with the first equilibrium sequence.
However, conditional on the first paper being a provincial Party paper, 2 of 6 possi-
ble entry sequences are consistent with the theory, and 21 of the 25 observed entry
sequences are in alignment with either equilibrium. Under random entry, the condi-
tional probability of observing this outcome is 2 in 10 million.
     Four markets contradict the theoretical predictions. In two markets, Guangzhou
and Kunming, the provincial CCPCs already had a commercial paper in 1981, and
prefectural commercial newspapers entered afterward. One likely reason is that these
two markets were well developed even before our sample period. For example, in
Guangzhou, the provincial Party Evening was a nationally w          ­ ell-known newspaper
in the 1950s. The other two inconsistencies are Nanjing and Hangzhou, where a pro-
vincial commercial paper entered the market earlier than its prefectural counterpart.
     Overall, the results above conform to our argument that ­lower-level CCPCs value
political goals less than ­higher-level CCPCs and thus have greater incentives to launch
­less-biased newspapers. The results are also consistent with the previous finding of a
 negative correlation between newspaper bias and administrative rank. All these find-
 ings imply that the emergence of commercial papers run by ­lower-level governments
 is an important factor that reduces the audience’s exposure to media bias.
2472                       THE AMERICAN ECONOMIC REVIEW                SEPTEMBER 2018



                 C. ­Politico-Economic Trade-Off and Market Entry

   We examine how economic and political factors affect the entry of newspapers
(Proposition 3), using the sample of newspapers in the 256 ­non-capital prefectures.
In these markets, newspapers are operated either by a monopolist prefectural CCPC
or by a prefectural CCPC and a county CCPC (before 2003). Because information
on ­prefecture-level GDP in 1­ 992–1993 is not available, we use data from 1­ 987–1991
and ­1994–2011. A first observation shows that the entry of newspapers in these pre-
fectural markets typically follows the sequence of “no newspaper—Party Dailies—
an Evening or Subsidiary,” which is a pattern that aligns the predictions implied by
Proposition 3.
   Formally, we regress the number of commercial and Party papers in each mar-
ket on our measures of the size of advertising markets and expected political val-
uation defined in Section VA, controlling for the logarithm of population. Table 6
reports the results. The first three columns present the ­ordered-probit regressions
for three dependent variables: the number of prefectural Party papers; the number
of ­prefectural commercial papers; and the number of county Party papers. Note
that, in column 3, we only include observations before 2003 because most county
papers were closed in 2003. The last three columns are robustness checks in which
we regress the same three dependent variables, using OLS estimation with controls
of prefecture fixed effects.
   Two main results emerge. First, the size of advertising markets is positively
correlated with the number of newspapers in both the sample of p­ refecture-level
commercial papers and the sample of ­county-level Party papers. However, the cor-
relation is small and only marginally significant in the sample of the m  ­ ost-biased
prefectural Party papers. These results imply that growth in advertising markets
may have reduced readers’ exposure to media bias through the entry of commercial
newspapers. Second, the political valuation of media bias within a region is cor-
related positively with the entry of prefectural Party papers and negatively with the
entry of prefectural commercial papers but is unrelated to the entry of ­county-level
Party papers. This last result is also aligned with Proposition 3.

                                   VI. Conclusion

   Because of the prevalence of propaganda and the suppression of negative news,
the Chinese media are commonly known to be politically biased. Some public
intellectuals have lambasted the pervasive propaganda in the Chinese media as
constraining the growth of rational and informed citizens (He 2007). Thus, it is
of great importance to determine what factors drive the media to deviate from the
bias imposed by the ruling party. Existing studies focus on a centralized solution:
the central government may relax media control to utilize b­ ottom-up information
that is useful for monitoring or surveillance. The current paper shifts the focus to
a decentralized solution: economic competition between local governments with
different political valuations erodes the central government’s goal of maintaining
media bias.
   We first develop a measure of the political bias of a newspaper based on
    coverage of CCP mouthpiece information, politically sensitive or negative
its ­
VOL. 108 NO. 9                                 QIN ET AL.: MEDIA BIAS IN CHINA                                 2473



         Table 6—Politico-Economic Factors and Market Entry in Non-Capital Prefectures

                                            Ordered probit                                   OLS
Administrative level:          Prefecture      Prefecture     County       Prefecture     Prefecture       County
Newspaper type:                  Party        Commercial       Party         Party       Commercial         Party
                                  (1)             (2)           (3)           (4)            (5)             (6)
Advertising Mkt                  0.250           1.727         1.592         0.014           0.385          1.607
  (log10 RMB 2011)              (0.332)         (0.295)       (0.291)       (0.079)         (0.193)        (0.483)
Expected political value        10.883         −9.547        −3.174
                                (4.922)         (3.762)       (4.298)
Fixed effects                    Year            Year          Year         Year and       Year and        Year and
                                                                           Prefecture     Prefecture      Prefecture
Observations                     4,590           4,590         2,671         4,590           4,590          2,671
R2                                                                           0.664           0.735          0.857

Notes: The dependent variable in each column is the number of newspapers at the specified administrative level and
of the specified type. The results of column 1 to 3 are obtained from ordered-probit regressions, and results of col-
umn 4 to 6 are from OLS regressions. The unit of observation is prefecture by year. In columns 1 and 4, the depen-
dent variable is the number of Party Dailies at the prefecture level. In columns 2 and 5, the dependent variable is
the number of Party Evenings and Subsidiary newspapers at the prefecture level. In columns 3 and 6, the dependent
variable is the number of Party Dailies at the county level. Advertising Mkt is the predicted advertising revenue.
Expected political value is the predicted media bias based on the variables—TreatyPorts and CCP_Stronghold—
from the bias regressions in Table 4 and aggregated at the prefecture level. In all regressions, logarithm of popula-
tion is controlled for. Standard errors are clustered by prefecture in parentheses.



 i­nformation, and commercially oriented content. This bias measure demonstrates a
  strong ­positive c­ orrelation with the political valuation of media control (e.g., being
  a CCP m  ­ outhpiece and the intensity of censorship) and a strong negative c­ orrelation
  with economic valuation (e.g., newspaper advertising revenues and indices of market
  development). Using this measure of media bias, we find a large body of evidence
  that is consistent with the theoretical argument we propose: ­lower-level governments
  care less about the political value of media bias and produce l­ ess-biased ­newspapers;
  the resulting b­ ottom-up competition impairs the ­higher-level governments’ political
 goal of bias exposure.
     Three insights emerge from this study. First, there exists a ­politico-economic
trade-off in the production of media bias. The Chinese government attempts to use
a product differentiation strategy to achieve dual ­politico-economic goals: Party
papers focus on political goals, whereas commercial papers focus on ­economic goals.
Empirically, we show that this strategy is not effective in resolving the ­dual-goal con-
flict because newspaper markets are connected across newspaper types and adminis-
trative levels. Most strikingly, we find that the exogenous exit of ­county-level Party
papers decreased the bias of ­upper-level commercial papers but increased the bias of
­upper-level Party papers. Together with the entry pattern of commercial papers, this
 finding squares with the theoretical argument that the ­politico-economic goal cannot
 be achieved without conflict unless the markets of Party and commercial papers are
 completely segregated, or consumers are perfectly ­multi-homing.
     The ­politico-economic trade-off in Chinese newspapers is rooted in the existence
 of consumers who discriminate against propaganda. Thus, injecting propaganda into
 the marketplace incurs an economic cost, analogous to Becker’s (1957) theory of
 racial discrimination. This insight may be generalizable to developing countries in
 which the media, whether ­state-owned or privately owned, are regulated to produce
2474                             THE AMERICAN ECONOMIC REVIEW                       SEPTEMBER 2018



    p­ ro-government content that is disliked by the general audience. We demonstrate
     that even within an autocracy such as China, as long as the system creates enough
     incentives for media owners to pursue economic benefits, the cost of manufacturing
     media bias will escalate with market competition.
         The second insight is that ­    bottom-up competition within the government
   hierarchy erodes ­
   ­                       higher-level governments’ political goals. Despite China’s
   strict control of the media, the ownership of newspapers is decentralized to local
   ­governments. ­Lower-level governments are likely to care less about the political
    cost of reducing media bias because, as we theoretically propose, the value of media
    bias has e­ xternalities that are not entirely internalized by l­ower-level governments.
  Consistent with this idea, we find that l­ower-level governments tend to produce
  ­less-biased newspapers and introduce commercial papers earlier. Furthermore, the
   entry of commercial papers from the ­bottom-up should fuel market competition and
   induce ­higher-level governments to produce l­ess-biased papers. This phenomenon
   is precisely what we empirically observe.
         This insight may be generalized to other areas of the Chinese economy, ­particularly
   those where production has externalities across regions. For example, the political
   goals of some Chinese SOEs, such as maintaining social stability and protecting
   the environment, may generate externalities that are less internalized by ­lower-level
   governments. Our findings suggest that hierarchical competition is likely to hinder
   the attainment of these political goals.
         Finally, the overall evidence points to the view that economic development
   reduces audience exposure to propaganda in China. We find that commercial papers
   act substantially less than Party papers as government mouthpieces. Moreover, the
   growth of advertising markets is significantly correlated with the increased entry of
­less-biased newspapers (commercial papers and county Party papers) but not with
 the entry of ­more-biased newspapers (­higher-level Party papers). In Figure A2, we
 plot an average reader’s exposure to newspaper bias, estimated by newspaper types
 and implied by newspaper entries and exits, from 1981 to 2011. This ­exposure
 exhibits an ­inverted-U shape: despite its initial increase caused by the entry of Party
 papers, the bias exposure decreased after the late 1990s because of the influx of
 ­less-biased commercial newspapers. This massive entry of commercial papers was
  associated with the gradual withdrawal of most Party papers from street v­ endors.
  From the government’s perspective, the decline in audience exposure to Party
  papers means that propaganda through the market place has become ineffective.
  This provides a possible explanation for the Chinese government’s extensive efforts
  to engineer propaganda on social media platforms, which are directly regulated by
  the central government (Qin, Strömberg, and Wu 2017).

                                          REFERENCES

Adena, Maja, Ruben Enikolopov, Maria Petrova, Veronica Santarosa, and Ekaterina Zhuravskaya.
   2015. “Radio and the Rise of the Nazis in Prewar Germany.” Quarterly Journal of Economics 130
   (4): 1885–939.
Bai, Chong-En, Jiangyong Lu, and Zhigang Tao. 2006. “ The Multitask Theory of State Enterprise
   Reform: Empirical Evidence from China.” American Economic Review 96 (2): 353–57.
                                                                                           ­ overnment
Bai, Jie, Mikhail Golosov, Nancy Qian, and Yan Kai. 2015. “ Understanding the Influence of G
   Controlled Media: Evidence from Air Pollution in China.” Unpublished.
VOL. 108 NO. 9                           QIN ET AL.: MEDIA BIAS IN CHINA                          2475


Baldasty, Gerald J. 1992. The Commercialization of News in the Nineteenth Century. Madison, WI:
   University of Wisconsin Press.
Bamman, David, Brendan O’Connor, and Noah A. Smith. 2012. “Censorship and Deletion Practices in
   Chinese Social Media.” First Monday 17 (3–5).
Becker, Gary S. 1957. The Economics of Discrimination. Chicago: University of Chicago Press.
Besley, Timothy, and Andrea Prat. 2006. “Handcuffs for the Grabbing Hand? Media Capture and
   ­Government Accountability.” American Economic Review 96 (3): 720 –36.
Boycko, Maxim, Andrei Shleifer, and Robert W. Vishny. 1996. “A Theory of Privatisation.” Economic
   Journal 106 (435): 309–19.
Brunetti, Aymo, and Beatrice Weder. 2003. “A Free Press Is Bad News for Corruption.” Journal of
   Public Economics 87 (7– 8): 1801–24.
Cantoni, Davide, Yuyu Chen, David Y. Yang, Noam Yuchtman, and Y. Jane Zhang. 2017. “Curriculum
   and Ideology.” Journal of Political Economy 125 (2): 338–92.
Cao, Yuanzheng, Yingyi Qian, and Barry R. Weingast. 1999. “From Federalism, Chinese Style to
   ­Privatization, Chinese Style.” Economics of Transition 7 (1): 103–31.
Chen, Huailin, and Zhongshi Guo. 1999. “An Analyze of Divergent Development in Advertising
       ­ arket Shares among Party and Mass Newspapers.” Mass Communication Research (Taiwan) 57:
       M
       5–26.
Chen, Huailin, and Chin-Chuan Lee. 1998. “Press Finance and Economic Reform in China.” China
      Review: 577– 609.
Chinese Journalism Yearbook. 2003. Beijing: Chinese Journalism Yearbook Press.
D’Alessio, Dave, and Mike Allen. 2000. “ Media Bias in Presidential Elections: A Meta-Analysis.”
    J­ ournal of Communication 50 (4): 133–56.
Durante, Ruben, and Brian Knight. 2012. “Partisan Control, Media Bias, and Viewer Responses:
      ­Evidence from Berlusconi’s Italy.” Journal of the European Economic Association 10 (3):
   ­451– 81.
Egorov, Georgy, Sergei Guriev, and Konstantin Sonin. 2009. “Why Resource-Poor Dictators Allow
     Freer Media: A Theory and Evidence from Panel Data.” American Political Science Review 103
     (4): 645– 68.
Enikolopov, Ruben, Maria Petrova, and Ekaterina Zhuravskaya. 2011. “ Media and Political
       ­Persuasion: Evidence from Russia.” American Economic Review 101 (7): 3253– 85.
Fan, Gang, and Xiaolu Wang. 2009. Market Development Index in China. Beijing: Economics ­Science
     Press.
Gabszewicz, Jean J., Dider Laussel, and Nathalie Sonnac. 2001. “Press Advertising and the Ascent of
     the ‘Pensee Unique.’” European Economic Review 45 (4 –6): 641–51.
Galvis, Ángela Fonseca, James M. Snyder, Jr., and B. K. Song. 2016. “Newspaper Market Structure and
     Behavior: Partisan Coverage of Political Scandals in the United States from 1870 to 1910.” Journal
     of Politics 78 (2): 368– 81.
Gehlbach, Scott, and Konstantin Sonin. 2014. “Government Control of the Media.” Journal of Public
     Economics 118: 163–71.
Gentzkow, Matthew, Edward L. Glaeser, and Claudia Goldin. 2006. “ The Rise of the Fourth Estate:
     How Newspapers Became Informative and Why It Mattered.” In Corruption and Reform: Lessons
     from America’s Economic History, edited by Edward L. Glaeser and Claudia Goldin, 187–230.
     ­Chicago: National Bureau of Economic Research.
Gentzkow, Matthew, and Jesse M. Shapiro. 2006. “Media Bias and Reputation.” Journal of Political
     Economy 114 (2): 280–316.
Gentzkow, Matthew, and Jesse M. Shapiro. 2010. “What Drives Media Slant? Evidence from U.S.
       Daily Newspapers.” Econometrica 78 (1): 35-71.
Gentzkow, Matthew, Jesse M. Shapiro, and Michael Sinkinson. 2014. “Competition and ­Ideological
        Diversity: Historical Evidence from US Newspapers.” American Economic Review 104 (10):
        ­3073–114.
Gentzkow, Matthew, Jesse M. Shapiro, and Daniel F. Stone. 2016. “Media Bias in the Marketplace:
    Theory.” In Handbook of Media Economics, Vol. 1B, edited by Simon P. Anderson, Joel Waldfogel,
    and David Strömberg, 623– 46. Amsterdam: Elsevier.
Groseclose, Tim, and Jeffrey Milyo. 2005. “A Measure of Media Bias.” Quarterly Journal of E ­ conomics
         120 (4): 1191–237.
He, Qinglian. 2007. The Fog of Censorship: Media Control in China. Translated by Paul Frank. New
       York: Human Rights in China.
Hsieh, Chang-Tai, and Zheng Song. 2015. “Grasp the Large, Let Go of the Small: The Transformation
     of the State Sector in China.” Brookings Papers on Economic Activity: 295–346.
2476                               THE AMERICAN ECONOMIC REVIEW                      SEPTEMBER 2018


Inman, Robert P., and Daniel L. Rubinfeld. 1997. “Rethinking Federalism.” Journal of Economic
   ­Perspectives 11 (4): 43– 64.
Jia, Ruixue. 2014. “ The Legacies of Forced Freedom: China’s Treaty Ports.” Review of Economics and
   Statistics 96 (4): 596 – 608.
King, Gary, Jennifer Pan, and Margaret E. Roberts. 2013. “How Censorship in China Allows
     ­ overnment Criticism but Silences Collective Expression.” American Political Science Review 107
     G
     (2): 326– 43.
Larcinese, Valentino, Riccardo Puglisi, and James M. Snyder, Jr. 2011. “Partisan Bias in ­Economic
      News: Evidence on the Agenda-Setting Behavior of U.S. Newspapers.” Journal of Public ­Economics
      95 (9 –10): 1178– 89.
Lerner, A. P., and H. W. Singer. 1937. “Some Notes on Duopoly and Spatial Competition.” Journal of
     Political Economy 45 (2): 145– 86.
Lin, Justin Yifu, and Guofu Tan. 1999. “Policy Burdens, Accountability, and the Soft Budget
     ­Constraint.” American Economic Review 89 (2): 426–31.
Lorentzen, Peter. 2014. “China’s Strategic Censorship.” American Journal of Political Science 58 (2):
      402–14.
Man, Yunlai. 2001. “ Development Strategy of the Chinese Media in the New Century.” Chinese
    ­Journalist, Vol. 2.
Mullainathan, Sendhil, and Andrei Shleifer. 2005. “ The Market for News.” American Economic
      Review 95 (4): 1031–53.
Oates, Wallace E. 1972. Fiscal Federalism. New York: Harcourt Brace Jovanovich.
Ou, Susan, and Heyu Xiong. 2017. “ Linguistic Barriers to State Capacity and Ideology: Evidence from
      the Cultural Revolution.” Unpublished.
Prat, Andrea, and David Strömberg. 2013. “ The Political Economy of Mass Media.” In Advances in
      Economics and Econometrics, edited by Daron Acemoglu, Manuel Arellano, and Eddie Dekel,
      135–87. New York: Cambridge University Press.
Puglisi, Riccardo, and James M. Snyder, Jr. 2016. “ Empirical Studies of Media Bias.” In Handbook
     of Media Economics, Vol. 1B, edited by Simon Anderson, Joel Waldfogel, and David Strömberg,
     648– 67. Amsterdam: Elsevier.
Qin, Bei, David Strömberg, and Yanhui Wu. 2017. “ Why Does China Allow Freer Social
     Media? ­Protests versus Surveillance and Propaganda.” Journal of Economic Perspectives 31 (1):
     117– 40.
Qin, Bei, David Strömberg, and Yanhui Wu. 2018. “Media Bias in China: Dataset.” American ­Economic
      Review. https://doi.org/10.1257/aer.20170947.
Shleifer, Andrei, and Robert W. Vishny. 1994. “ Politicians and Firms.” Quarterly Journal of E
                                                                                             ­ conomics
      109 (4): 995–1025.
Stockmann, Daniela. 2012. Media Commercialization and Authoritarian Rule in China. New York:
      Cambridge University Press.
Tetlock, Paul C. 2007. “Giving Content to Investor Sentiment: The Role of Media in the Stock Market.”
     Journal of Finance 62 (3): 1139– 68.
Wu, Wei. 2004. “ The Historical Evolution of Chinese Newspapers.” Chinese Newspapers Yearbook.
Xu, Chenggang. 2011. “ The Fundamental Institutions of China’s Reforms and Development.” Journal
      of Economic Literature 49 (4): 1076–151.
Yanagizawa-Drott, David. 2014. “Propaganda and Conflict: Evidence from the Rwandan Genocide.”
      Quarterly Journal of Economics 129 (4): 1947–94.
Yang, Lei, and Ye Sun. 2001. “A Survey of Provincial Party Papers in China.” News Reporters, Vol. 8.
Yao, Haiying. 2003. “ Where to Go? The 9000 County Journalists.” Journal of 21-Century Human
   ­Capital.
Zhang, Kun, and Fang Zhou. 2004. “ On the Management of County Papers.” Press Journalists, Vol. 3.
Zhao, Yuezhi. 1998. Media, Market, and Democracy in China: Between the Party Line and the Bottom
     Line. Champaign, IL: University of Illinois Press.
