              informatics
Opinion
Patient Care, Information, Communication and Social Media
Influencing Bias—A Discourse
Paula M. Procter

                                          Department of Nursing & Midwifery, Sheffield Hallam University, Sheffield S1 1WB, UK; p.procter@shu.ac.uk


                                          Abstract: Misinformation and disinformation are prevalent across society today, their rise to promi-
                                          nence developed mainly through the expansion of social media. Communication has always been
                                          recognised in health and care settings as the most important element between people who are re-
                                          ceiving care and those delivering, managing, and evaluating care. This paper, through a discourse
                                          approach, will explore communication through the perception of information formed following
                                          personal selection of influencers and try to determine how such affects patient care.

                                          Keywords: patient communication; misinformation; social media; influencers




                                               Misinformation and disinformation are prevalent across society today, their rise to
                                          prominence developed mainly through the expansion of social media. Misinformation is
                                          considered to present false information, presented as fact, regardless of intent to deceive;
                                whereas disinformation is a type of misinformation that is intentionally false and intended
         
                                          to deceive or mislead [1]. They bring with them particular complexities for health and
Citation: Procter, P.M. Patient Care,     social care for both the patient/consumer and the care professional.
Information, Communication and                 Communication between people is recognised in health and care settings as the most
Social Media Influencing Bias—A           important element between those who are receiving care (patients) and those delivering,
Discourse. Informatics 2021, 8, 28.       managing, and evaluating care (healthcare professionals). The coronavirus pandemic has
https://doi.org/10.3390/
                                          highlighted the significance we all place on communication in all its forms, which are
informatics8020028
                                          commonly considered as verbal, non-verbal and para-verbal [2]. This paper will explore
                                          communication through the perception of true or false information formed following the
Academic Editors: Diane Skiba and
                                          personal selection of influencers through digital media alongside developed bias and try to
Michelle Honey
                                          determine how such impacts upon patient care.
                                               Human communication is often perceived as an exchange of information between
Received: 12 March 2021
Accepted: 15 April 2021
                                          two or more individuals [3] through live conversations in person or via a telephone/video
Published: 18 April 2021
                                          or through written media such as letters. Today, communication may include the use of
                                          digital devices, allowing for a diversity of communication applications such as searching
Publisher’s Note: MDPI stays neutral
                                          for information (e.g., Google, Baidu, Shenma), meetings in groups (e.g., Zoom, WeChat,
with regard to jurisdictional claims in
                                          WhatsApp, Instagram, TikTok), keeping up with the latest comments (e.g., Facebook,
published maps and institutional affil-   Twitter, Sina Weibo, News agencies).
iations.                                       The core of the exploration in this paper will consider whether the array of information
                                          sources available have the possibility to develop bias in individuals and especially as
                                          to whether this has the potential to affect the way in which nurses and all healthcare
                                          professionals are able to help those in their care through maintaining a lack of bias when
Copyright: © 2021 by the author.
                                          communicating with patients. We know, through health professional regulatory body
Licensee MDPI, Basel, Switzerland.
                                          standards, that it is important as health professionals to provide unbiased care to those to
This article is an open access article
                                          whom we attend but in a time of digital influencers, the question to be addressed is how
distributed under the terms and           can bias be reduced to meet patient need in practice?
conditions of the Creative Commons             To live as an individual, a member of a family, or within a community, or profession,
Attribution (CC BY) license (https://     we all need information, and this information forms the basis of our being [4]. Following a
creativecommons.org/licenses/by/          constructivist path [5], since birth, gathering information has been key to our development,
4.0/).                                    from crawling to move somewhere else, to gaining new knowledge and skills throughout



Informatics 2021, 8, 28. https://doi.org/10.3390/informatics8020028                                    https://www.mdpi.com/journal/informatics
Informatics 2021, 8, x                                                                                                                   2 of 7



Informatics 2021, 8, 28                                                                                                                 2 of 7
                          a constructivist path [5], since birth, gathering information has been key to our develop-
                          ment, from crawling to move somewhere else, to gaining new knowledge and skills
                          throughout childhood and beyond. In all these developmental activities, we have all been
                          childhood and
                          influenced          beyond.
                                        by those         In allusthese
                                                     around         which    has led to us activities,
                                                                          developmental                    we have based
                                                                                              making decisions        all been   influenced
                                                                                                                              upon    our ac-
                          by those around
                          ceptance              us which
                                     or rejection     of these     led to us making
                                                              hasinfluencers    [6].       decisions based upon our acceptance or
                          rejection              this further,[6].
                                     of these influencers
                                In exploring                      it is generally accepted that most entering adulthood have
                                In exploring     this
                          a considerable historyfurther,of life it   is generally
                                                                  events    and this  accepted
                                                                                        is uniquethattomost     person. adulthood
                                                                                                        eachentering       A great deal  have
                                                                                                                                            of
                          a considerable      history   of   life events    and   this  is  unique   to each
                          personal history has been influenced by those around them and as the days, weeks,    person.     A  great   deal  of
                          personal
                          months and history   hasgo
                                           years    been
                                                       by,influenced
                                                              more choices      will around
                                                                           by those    need tothem     and asinthe
                                                                                                 be made          thedays,
                                                                                                                       pathsweeks,
                                                                                                                               each months
                                                                                                                                      person
                          and   years  go  by,  more    choices    will   need  to   be made    in the  paths
                          chooses to follow and whether biased views are a challenge to living and learning     each   person          [7]. to
                                                                                                                                 chooses
                          follow and whether biased views are a challenge to living and learning [7].
                                In recent years, it appears as though the mass of information available to us through
                                In recent years, it appears as though the mass of information available to us through
                          various online platforms has driven many to be selective in their choice of influence. Ac-
                          various online platforms has driven many to be selective in their choice of influence.
                          cording to Chaffey [8], Social media users are now spending an average of 2 h and 24 min per day
                          According to Chaffey [8], Social media users are now spending an average of 2 h and 24 min
                          multi-networking across an average of eight social networks and messaging apps. There is an
                          per day multi-networking across an average of eight social networks and messaging apps. There
                          awareness that pretty much everything we do online is tracked in some way or other and
                          is an awareness that pretty much everything we do online is tracked in some way or
                          that privacy laws have been slow to protect us all from feeding the ‘big data’ machine.
                          other and that privacy laws have been slow to protect us all from feeding the ‘big data’
                          When shopping online, we know that on subsequent digital platforms we are likely to see
                          machine. When shopping online, we know that on subsequent digital platforms we are
                          adverts for similar items. this, we have learnt over a very short period of time. However,
                          likely to see adverts for similar items. this, we have learnt over a very short period of
                          have we started to think about our use of smart technologies in our homes and how our
                          time. However, have we started to think about our use of smart technologies in our homes
                          choices   in the use of technologies such as virtual assistants, smart fridges, smart televi-
                          and how our choices in the use of technologies such as virtual assistants, smart fridges,
                          sions—the     list is endless—will
                          smart televisions—the                     influence our
                                                        list is endless—will           choice options
                                                                                    influence            in the
                                                                                                our choice        future?
                                                                                                              options    in Of   future?itOf
                                                                                                                            thecourse,       is
                          not  a one  direction    issue,   there   will  be many      benefits  as well   as challenges
                          course, it is not a one direction issue, there will be many benefits as well as challenges in      in the  way   we
                          live as we
                          the way    weprogress
                                         live as we  further
                                                       progress intofurther
                                                                       the 21st  Century,
                                                                              into  the 21st the   pandemic
                                                                                              Century,          in 2020 clearly
                                                                                                                            in 2020demon-
                                                                                                          the pandemic                 clearly
                          strated  the   need   for  agility   and    resilience   in  our  daily  lives
                          demonstrated the need for agility and resilience in our daily lives as patients as  patients   or  healthor profes-
                                                                                                                                       health
                          sionals, or both.
                          professionals,    or both.
                                To  explore the
                                To explore     the issues     further and
                                                    issues further           to frame
                                                                        and to   frame thethe theme
                                                                                              theme of of the  paper it
                                                                                                          the paper        might be
                                                                                                                        it might        useful
                                                                                                                                   be useful
                          to consider    a humanistic      information       model    as  a representation     of
                          to consider a humanistic information model as a representation of information ‘flows’ of information     ‘flows’  of
                          individuals,    be   they   those    in our    care  as  patients   or  those  in   our   care
                          individuals, be they those in our care as patients or those in our care as colleagues or family.as  colleagues    or
                          family.  Pictorially,
                          Pictorially,  the model        shownisas
                                                  theismodel         shown
                                                                        Figureas1.Figure 1.




                          Figure 1.
                          Figure               Information Model
                                    Humanistic Information
                                 1. Humanistic                   [9].
                                                           Model [9].

                               Although shown
                               Although   shown as   static on
                                                  as static on the page, it
                                                                          it is
                                                               the page,        important that
                                                                             is important  that you consider the
                                                                                                you consider      four cogs
                                                                                                              the four cogs
                          as turning, as turning cogs  generate  power.   The   four cogs can represent an individual,
                          as turning, as turning cogs generate power. The four cogs can represent an individual,           a
                                                                                                                        oror
                          team, department,   professional   discipline, or organisation,  but for now, the individual
                          a team, department, professional discipline, or organisation, but for now, the individual     use
                          version will be considered.
                          use version will be considered.
                               Every waking moment we receive information through all our senses, the acquisition
                          cog is constantly turning, which drives the other cogs and commonly, this information
                          comes to us with pre-determined values (jagged line). That is, from sources which place
Informatics 2021, 8, 28                                                                                              3 of 7




                          their value on the information, such as news bulletins, conversations with friends; or, bland
                          (straight line) with no values added, such as, for example, a certain aroma from a candle,
                          although this may evoke memories within us.
                                 The acquisition cog is connected to the processing cog and the dissemination cog, this
                          allows for information passage which is either discarded immediately or processed. The
                          processing cog is the key link between new information and stored information, where
                          the latter contains our life history, including decisions we have made at different points in
                          our lives which have made us the person we are. Within the processing cog is a moveable
                          line dividing conscious and unconscious thought. During our life history we have learnt,
                          for example, how doors work, thus, most times we do not consciously think about going
                          through doorways; however, if we are blocked, then the thought level crosses the line into
                          conscious thought, and we read ‘pull’ whilst we have been pushing the door. The position
                          of the line determines just how much conscious or unconscious thought we place upon
                          new information and the influence of stored information has in the determination of the
                          position of the line, in health and care settings the line for a professional member of the
                          care team may be quite high (unconscious level, almost automatic), as such, a conversation
                          with a patient has been carried out before, whereas for the patient all the information has
                          the potential to be new and so the line is low (conscious level, listening hard, trying to take
                          it all in) as new knowledge is being processed.
                                 The next cog is the storage cog, this holds us, our memories, and our lived experiences.
                          It is this cog that influences the way we deal with new information based upon experiences
                          and knowledge developed along the life path to date. As time goes by, there can be difficulty
                          in raising memories to the conscious level and this is acutely seen in those suffering with
                          dementia, as access to memory reduces over time until just the physical presence of the
                          individual is left. Such memory loss and ability to filter at conscious and unconscious levels
                          how information is processed, suggests that stored information is important to progress
                          through life.
                                 Finally, the dissemination cog, linking to the storage cog and the acquisition cog. There
                          are two routes that information can move, either into the acquisition cog where additional
                          information can be sought to add to that already held (seeking evidence); or, disseminated
                          externally with individual values amassed during the process. Just the facial expression,
                          way of standing or walking towards or away will signal your values/biases as to whether
                          that is intended or not.
                                 Today, the plethora of information available to us through all forms of media, devices
                          and people we meet is vast. Below, taken from the 2019 World Economic Forum [10], are
                          estimates of data that are accessed/uploaded every day:
                          •    500 million tweets are sent;
                          •    294 billion emails are sent;
                          •    Four petabytes of data are created on Facebook;
                          •    Four terabytes of data are created from each connected car;
                          •    65 billion messages are sent on WhatsApp;
                          •    Five billion searches are made.
                               Indeed, recent reports have suggested that due to reduced airplane traffic linked to the
                          coronavirus pandemic and the lack of constant information received from sensors in-flight,
                          that predicting the weather forecast has become less accurate [11]. There have been tales
                          of individuals using You TubeTM to build a house from scratch or making sourdough
                          bread with no baking experience, let alone finding information on health-related material
                          available on multiple social media platforms. The difficulty, particularly in relation to
                          health and social influencers, is how individuals, patients and professionals, can determine
                          the reliability and robustness of the information they find. Saigal [12] considered the
                          access to health information at the outset of the COVID-19 pandemic, particularly in
                          western cultures, where some 74% of knowledge influence came from news organisations,
                          with only around 1% being drawn from official health and science sites which led to
Informatics 2021, 8, 28                                                                                           4 of 7




                          incorrect understanding and potential dissemination of false knowledge, misinformation
                          or disinformation.
                                A perfect storm would appear to be on the horizon based upon the level of ability of
                          individuals to process influencing information at the conscious or unconscious level, the
                          word ‘infodemic’ has been introduced into our language to describe a mass of information
                          which may mislead and polarise opinions [13]. Within the realms of health and care
                          professional working, there is a distinct need to calm the storm and enable practitioners
                          not only to be digitally capable but also intelligently influence knowledgeable which
                          necessitates an understanding by the health professional of the patient’s view and checking
                          their perceptions of the information being exchanged in a care setting.
                                Building upon an individual’s stored information, their life history, and making sure
                          that the line between conscious and unconscious processing is appropriately positioned
                          are complex issues but necessary to promote smart knowledge influence. It is relatively
                          simple, after many years of professional practice, to assess someone in your care and have
                          a ‘sixth sense’ that a deeper view of the situation needs to be taken, but how can such
                          professional curiosity be developed in a healthcare student who is facing such a situation
                          for the first time or, indeed, a patient facing a new diagnosis or changes to their long time
                          condition? This is where education comes in for both the practitioner and the patient and
                          now that there is such a close relationship between human communication and information
                          technology, maybe it is time to blend the two?
                                We know that the emerging Fourth Industrial Revolution (Industry 4.0) [14] will
                          change the way in which information is sourced, filtered, and used. In the past thirty years
                          we have changed logistics in manufacturing from bulk ordering to just-in-time supply
                          chains, could this become a basis for re-thinking undergraduate learning? It has been
                          argued that ‘just-in-time’ (JIT) learning strengthens effectiveness and productivity [15] but
                          it is equally acknowledged that this is not the silver bullet, and as such, requires JIT to
                          be used appropriately where it will have most relevance and impact for the individual
                          whether they be a patient, healthcare professional student, or where the ‘student’ could be
                          a patient or health provider [16]. Chute and French [17] developed a personal perspective
                          for individuals which they cite as Care 4.0, using aspects of Industry 4.0 to demonstrate
                          the ways in which healthcare can be transformed to meet the needs of individuals through
                          digital technologies.
                                The ownership of learning and the building of knowledge through information gath-
                          ering belongs to the individual, be that, in this instance, a patient or a member of the
                          professional health and care team, gathering information from any source across the infor-
                          mation intensive world in which we now live, individuals need to be information ‘smart’.
                          The World Health Organisation [18] offers seven tips for navigating the infodemic as shown
                          in Figure 2:
Informatics 2021, 8,
Informatics 2021, 8, 28
                     x                                                                                                                       of 77
                                                                                                                                          55 of




                             Figure 2. Top tips for navigating the infodemic, WHO, 2020.

                                 Social media
                                Social   media has      opened opportunities
                                                   has opened       opportunities for  for each
                                                                                            each of   us, patient
                                                                                                   of us,  patient and/or               profes-
                                                                                                                               health profes-
                                                                                                                     and/or health
                          sional, to
                          sional,  to align   ourselves to
                                       align ourselves          personally selected
                                                             to personally     selected influencers
                                                                                           influencers andand this   reduces the
                                                                                                                this reduces         diversity
                                                                                                                                the diversity
                          of information
                          of  information sharing.
                                              sharing. Is      there an
                                                           Is there        automatic assumption
                                                                       an automatic       assumption made made by     those receiving
                                                                                                                  by those    receiving carecare
                          (consumers      of care)  that   those    providing     care  must   be  qualified
                          (consumers of care) that those providing care must be qualified to do so and have    to do  so  and          the best
                                                                                                                                have the    best
                          interests  of  the  patient   at  the  centre  of all  they   do?  Points   1 and   3 above
                          interests of the patient at the centre of all they do? Points 1 and 3 above are concerned     are concerned       with
                          this issue.
                          with   this issue.
                                 An instance
                                An   instance from
                                                 from an     educational setting
                                                        an educational        setting is   offered to
                                                                                        is offered   to explore
                                                                                                        explore this             further. The
                                                                                                                        aspect further.
                                                                                                                  this aspect               The
                          digital  managed      learning    environment,       used   locally,  allows  for  statistical
                          digital managed learning environment, used locally, allows for statistical reports on stu-     reports   on  student
                          use as
                          dent     part
                                 use  as of
                                         parteveryday
                                               of everyday processes;    out of
                                                                 processes;    outinterest   I recently
                                                                                     of interest           explored
                                                                                                   I recently          one one
                                                                                                                            undergraduate
                                                                                                                explored          undergrad-
                          unit  of learning,     which    started    in October     2020   with   751  students
                          uate unit of learning, which started in October 2020 with 751 students enrolled.         enrolled.         totaltotal
                                                                                                                               The The       hits
                          recorded    were   8528   up  until   18  December      2020   and  of these,  no  accesses
                          hits recorded were 8528 up until 18 December 2020 and of these, no accesses to staff infor-   to staff  information
                          were made. Such a lack of enquiry about the author(s) of the learning content maybe
                          mation were made. Such a lack of enquiry about the author(s) of the learning content
                          suggests that there is a stored rationale that someone ‘teaching’ or offering knowledge
                          maybe suggests that there is a stored rationale that someone ‘teaching’ or offering
                          information must be knowledgeable and credible. Such lack of interest in those teaching
                          knowledge information must be knowledgeable and credible. Such lack of interest in
                          appears to be very different to the magnetism social media influencers generate. Is the
                          those teaching appears to be very different to the magnetism social media influencers gen-
                          same rationale transferred to other situations, particularly related to patients or their
                          erate. Is the same rationale transferred to other situations, particularly related to patients
                          relatives and friends where information is exchanged and if it is, how can this cycle be
                          or their relatives and friends where information is exchanged and if it is, how can this
                          broken allowing for authorship credibility to be assured between both the patient and the
                          cycle be broken allowing for authorship credibility to be assured between both the patient
                          healthcare professional?
                          and the healthcare professional?
                                 As considered earlier, each of us have developed our own biases during our lifetime
                                As considered earlier, each of us have developed our own biases during our lifetime
                          and when talking with patients, their relatives and friends, do we consider how our own
                          and when talking with patients, their relatives and friends, do we consider how our own
                          biases might affect our communication of information? For the patient, is there an auto-
                          biases   might affectthat
                          matic acceptance               communication
                                                    ourthe                       of information?
                                                              healthcare professional                 For the
                                                                                               is giving   the appropriate
                                                                                                                 patient, is there    an auto-
                                                                                                                                 information
                          for theacceptance
                          matic                                or does theprofessional
                                                  that the healthcare
                                   patient’s condition                         patient bring   is with
                                                                                                  givingthem     appropriate gained
                                                                                                            the information      information
                                                                                                                                           from
                          different sources through digital media that conflict with the professional guidancefrom
                          for  the patient’s    condition      or  does  the   patient    bring   with  them    information     gained      and
                          different
                          how might   sources    through
                                          this impact               themedia
                                                              digital
                                                           upon         trust in    theconflict
                                                                                 that             with the professional
                                                                                         care relationship?       What measureguidance      and
                                                                                                                                      of effec-
                          how   might    this impact     upon    the  trust  in  the  care  relationship?
                          tiveness of communication trustworthiness should be employed? There are certainly a What    measure     of effective-
                          lot toofchoose
                          ness      communication         trustworthiness
                                           from, for example,          Merk and  should
                                                                                     Rosmanbe employed?       There
                                                                                                 [19] and their       are certainly
                                                                                                                   thoughts             a lot to
                                                                                                                                on epistemic
                          choose   from,    for  example,     Merk     and  Rosman       [19] and    their  thoughts
                          trustworthiness through to the work of Best [20], who outlines elements of trust and          on  epistemic     trust-
                                                                                                                                              re-
                          worthiness     through     to the   work    of Best   [20],  who   outlines   elements
                          sponsibilities of information givers in the form of a blog. In any conversation there may  of trust  and   responsi-
                          bilities of information
                          be sensitivities    (biases)givers
                                                         that are     not form
                                                                  in the   obvious     blog.the
                                                                                  of auntil    In any   conversation
                                                                                                   conversation          there one
                                                                                                                    ‘touches’    mayofbethose
                                                                                                                                            sen-
                          sitivities  (biases)   that  are   not   obvious   until   the  conversation      ‘touches’
                          sensitivities. How do such biases, in terms of gateways to health care practice and trust-    one  of   those  sensi-
Informatics 2021, 8, 28                                                                                                              6 of 7




                                  worthiness, affect information exchange/communication in such settings? The coronavirus
                                   hospitalisations have demonstrated, once again, just how important communication is
                                   in the caring environment, is there a case now for an outreach approach to be taken by
                                   healthcare professionals using social media to extend the information and care support to
                                   those with whom therapeutic relationships have been formed beyond the hospital walls
                                   as was initially considered through using information prescriptions [21,22]? Point 6 in the
                                   above image concerns this issue.
                                         From the image, Points 2, 4 and 5 require health and care professionals to become
                                   smart knowledge influencers where those in their care can be assured that the information
                                   exchanged is up to date, evidence based and has a depth that is appropriate to allow for
                                   full understanding of the communication encounter. Health and care professionals need to
                                   take a key role in helping those in their care to be assured that the information contained in
                                   any communication is correct, and as such, act as ‘fact-checkers’ along with the overarching
                                   regulations such as privacy and data protection legislation.
                                         Information and communication often appear as simple concepts and indeed they
                                   are at a basic level, however, with the emergence of social media and greater access
                                   to information anytime and commonly anywhere, the possibilities for misinformation
                                   amongst patients are high. Such access is a complicating factor entering biases that all
                                   health and care practitioners need to understand, the humanistic information model relates
                                   both to professional activity communicating with those in their care and all individuals
                                   determining their conscious and unconscious processing of information, which may affect
                                   their understanding of the care offered. Technology will become more sophisticated and
                                   require us to be more discerning in the uptake of influenced information, the emerging
                                  ‘deepfake’ [23] computer generated versions of trusted individuals. As the focus of health
                                   care becomes more patient/consumer centric, it is vital that the role of influencers through
                                   social media is acknowledged in their presentation of a diverse range of views, accurately
                                   or inaccurately, which in turn, has the potential to create bias for both the patient and the
                                   healthcare professional, thus, complicating and blurring the communication processes.
                                         It is unlikely that there is a way of halting the infodemic, but there are ways of manag-
                                   ing it. In this paper, some of the points for consideration by health and care professionals
                                   as they communicate with patients have been outlined. It is acknowledged that further
                                  work needs to be undertaken in this area to ensure that there is recognition of 21st Century
                                  patient care information, misinformation, disinformation, and the role of influencers in
                                   determining health and care bias amongst patients and professional health care givers.

                                   Funding: This research received no external funding.
                                   Institutional Review Board Statement: Not applicable.
                                   Informed Consent Statement: Not applicable.
                                   Conflicts of Interest: The authors declare no conflict of interest.

References
1.    Gebel, M. Misinformation vs. Disinformation: What to Know about Each Form of False Information, and How to Spot Them
      Online. Business Insider. 2021. Available online: https://www.businessinsider.com/misinformation-vs-disinformation?r=US&
      IR=T (accessed on 12 March 2021).
2.    Berry, D. Health Communication—Theory and Practice; Open University Press: Berkshire, UK, 2007; ISBN 100335218709.
3.    Mortensen, C.D. Communication Theory, 2nd ed.; Routledge: London, UK, 2017; ISBN 0-60-044633-1.
4.    Piaget, J. Piaget’s Theory. In Piaget and His School, Springer Study ed.; Inhelder, B., Chipman, H.H., Zwingmann, C., Eds.; Springer:
      Berlin/Heidelberg, Germany, 1976. [CrossRef]
5.    Bada, S.O.; Olusegun, S. Constructivism Learning Theory: A Paradigm for Teaching and Learning. J. Res. Method Educ. 2015, 5,
      66–70.
6.    MacDonald, S. How 2020 is Changing the Influencer. 2020. Available online: https://www.shopify.co.uk/enterprise/how-2020
      -is-changing-the-influencer (accessed on 12 March 2021).
Informatics 2021, 8, 28                                                                                                             7 of 7




7.    HESA (Higher Education Statistics Agency). Higher Education Student Statistics: UK, 2017/18—Student Numbers and Charac-
      teristics. 2019. Available online: https://www.hesa.ac.uk/news/17-01-2019/sb252-higher-education-student-statistics/numbers
      (accessed on 12 March 2021).
8.    Chaffey, D. Global Social Media Research Summary August 2020. Smart Insights. 2020. Available online: https:
      //www.smartinsights.com/social-media-marketing/social-media-strategy/new-global-social-media-research/ (accessed on
      12 March 2021).
9.    Procter, P.M. The Role of Nurse Education in the Integration of Information in the Health Care Environment. In Nursing Informatics:
      The Impact of Nursing Knowledge on Health Care Informatics; Gerdin, U., Tallberg, M., Wainwright, P., Eds.; Springer: Amsterdam,
      The Netherlands, 1997; pp. 195–200.
10.   World Economic Forum. How Much Data is Generated Each Day? 2019. Available online: https://www.weforum.org/agenda/
      2019/04/how-much-data-is-generated-each-day-cf4bddf29f/ (accessed on 12 March 2021).
11.   Physics World. COVID-19 Pandemic Has Made Weather Forecasts Less Reliable. 2020. Available online: https://physicsworld.
      com/a/covid-19-pandemic-has-made-weather-forecasts-less-reliable/ (accessed on 12 March 2021).
12.   Saigal, T. Social Media and Health Information: Empowering or Misleading? 2020. Available online: https://www.the-hospitalist.
      org/hospitalist/article/229003/mixed-topics/social-media-and-health-information-empowering-or-misleading (accessed on
      12 March 2021).
13.   World Health Organisation. Managing the COVID-19 Infodemic: Promoting Healthy Behaviours and Mitigating the Harm from
      Misinformation and Disinformation. 2020. Available online: https://www.who.int/news/item/23-09-2020-managing-the-
      covid-19-infodemic-promoting-healthy-behaviours-and-mitigating-the-harm-from-misinformation-and-disinformation#:~{}:
      text=An%20infodemic%20is%20an%20overabundance,will%20continue%20to%20thrive (accessed on 12 March 2021).
14.   Schwab, K.; Davis, N. Shaping the Future of the Fourth Industrial Revolution: A Guide to Building a Better World; Portfolio Penguin:
      New York, NY, USA, 2018; ISBN 100241366372.
15.   Shanavaz, S.F. JIT Learning and How It Leads to Learning Effectiveness. 2019. Available online: https://elearningindustry.com/
      jit-learning-leads-learning-effectiveness (accessed on 12 March 2021).
16.   Macey, T. 7 Best Practices for Implementing Just-In-Time Learning. 2014. Available online: https://www.advantageperformance.
      com/implementing-just-in-time-learning/ (accessed on 12 March 2021).
17.   Chute, C.; French, T. Introducing Care 4.0: An Integrated Care Paradigm Built on Industry 4.0 Capabilities. Int. J. Environ. Res.
      Public Health 2019, 16, 2247. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
18.   World Health Organisation. Let’s Flatten the Infodemic Curve. 2020. Available online: https://www.who.int/news-room/
      spotlight/let-s-flatten-the-infodemic-curve (accessed on 12 March 2021).
19.   Merk, S.; Rosman, T. Smart but Evil? Student-Teachers’ Perception of Educational Researchers’ Epistemic Trustworthiness.
      AERA Open 2019, 5, 1–18. Available online: https://journals.sagepub.com/doi/pdf/10.1177/2332858419868158 (accessed on
      12 March 2021). [CrossRef]
20.   Best, J. Here’s What the Science Says about Building Trust with New Students. 3P Learning, 30 September 2020. Available online:
      https://www.3plearning.com/blog/building-trust-with-students/ (accessed on 12 March 2021).
21.   Department of Health. Better Information, Better Choices, Better Health: Putting Information at the Centre of Health; Department of
      Health: London, UK, 2004.
22.   Brewster, L.; Sen, B. ‘Quality signposting’: The role of online information prescription in providing patient information. Health
      Inf. Libr. J. 2011, 28, 59–67. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
23.   Debusmann, B. Deepfake is the Future of Content Creation. BBC News, 8 March 2021. Available online: https://www.bbc.co.uk/
      news/business-56278411(accessed on 12 March 2021).
